https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 10
Issue #6
June 2020

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 No Hunter at the Victory Day Parade
4 Alternate Medical Service for Russian Draftees
5 Inside Russia: Spreading Virus Disinformation Narratives
6 Faith and Russian Military Victory
8 Chinese Help to Restore the Kuznetsov
9 Toward a “System of Regional Security in the Arctic”: A
Russian Perspective
10 Looking Beyond China: Asian Actors in the Russian Arctic
(Part One)
12 Russian Airborne Troops Conduct High Altitude Arctic
Parachute Drop
14 Russia’s Baltic Fleet Forces Conduct Extensive Exercise in
Kaliningrad
15 Northern Fleet Expands Intelligence Support Vessels
16 Russian Electronic Warfare Leverages Artificial Intelligence
17 The Changing Character of War and the Growing Role of
Electronic Warfare
19 ‘Penitsillin’ Artillery Reconnaissance System Enters Service
20 Russian-Ukrainian Antagonism Spreads to History
21 Conscription in the Caucasus during Coronavirus
23 Kazakhstan’s Substitute Draft to Combat Coronavirus
25 COVID-19 in Spain
26 Spain’s Leftist Future and Ibero-American Connections

31 Chinese Information on COVID-19 in the PLA
32 China: Elevating the Status and Role of the People’s Armed
Police Force
33 A Look at the PLA’s Combat Medical Capabilities
35 China’s COVID-19 “Letter Diplomacy”
37 Chinese Views of Public Opinion Warfare
39 China’s COVID-19 Information Campaign is Backfiring in Europe
41 Philippine Insurgents Disrupt Army’s COVID-19 Response
42 Coronavirus Shutdown Complicates Southern Thailand Conflict
43 The Focus of Pakistan’s 2020 Green Book
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
45 China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in Saudi Arabia and Egypt
47 Domestic Drone Production in Saudi Arabia and the UAE
48 The Future of Turkey’s Drone Technology
49 Turkey’s Competing Interests with Gulf Nations
50 Turkey’s Involvement in Syria and Libya Stokes Regional Rivalry
51 Morocco and Tunisia Drawn into Middle East Geopolitical
Competition in Libya
53 Debating Why Turkey is Delaying S-400 Activation
54 Weaponizing Water in Syria
55 Iran Improves its UAV Technology
57 Khamenei Orders Investigation into Naval Accident
58 Iran: Prosecute Cybercriminals
59 Iran Talking to the Taliban
60 Threat of Coronavirus Complicates Yemen Ceasefire Discussions

INDO-PACIFIC
28 Chinese 6G Technology to Drive the Future Battlefield
29 Chinese Researchers Demonstrate Mobile Quantum Satellite AFRICA
Base Station
61 Boko Haram’s Strategic Initiatives to Increase Funding

62 Communications to Counter Extremism in the Lake Chad Basin
63 Somalia: Ethiopia’s Influence Rises as Kenya Prepares to Leave
AMISOM
64 Al-Shabaab in Somalia Turns to Criminal Activities in Kenya for
Funding
65 Al-Shabaab Kidnaps Professionals to Utilize Their Skills
66 The Impact of COVID-19 on African Security
67 Mali Struggles to Fight Pandemic
69 The EU Suspends Training Mission in Mali due to COVID-19
70 Chad Considers Withdrawing from Regional Military
Cooperation
71 Mozambican Civilians Unprotected from Insurgent Attacks
72 Affiliates of Al-Qaeda and ISIS Start Clashing in the Sahel
LATIN AMERICA
73 Colombia Warfare Update
75 Miscellaneous Venezuelan Misery
76 Daniel Ortega Reappears
77 COVID-19 in Ecuador and Peru
78 China’s COVID-19 Support to Peru Linked to Infrastructure Plans
79 Fake News in Bolivia
80 Uruguay Considers Changes to Immigration Laws to Attract
Foreign Investment
82 Jalisco New Generation Cartel (CJNG) Distributes Essentials
amid COVID-19 Pandemic
83 Mexico: Explosives and Drones found in Cholua, Intended for
Terrorism

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 10 | Issue 6

June | 2020

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Jennifer Byrne
Geoff Demarest
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Matthew Stein
Sergey Sukhankin
Tom Wilhelm

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Karen Kaya
Matthew Stein

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

Peter Wood
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Robert Bunker
David Dennis
Ihsan Gündüz
Alma Keshavarz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Robert Bunker
Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel
Alma Keshavarz
Stevie Lundell

ON THE COVER:
Russian paratroopers made a landing as part of a group on new parachute systems
from a height of 10,000 meters in arctic conditions.
Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.
htm?id=75731@cmsPhotoGallery, CCA 4.0

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
No Hunter at the Victory Day Parade
OE Watch Commentary: Due to coronavirus concerns, Russia’s main
Victory Day parade was comprised mostly of aircraft which, as the first
excerpt points out, “flew over Moscow’s Red Square to mark the 75th
anniversary of the Soviet Union’s Victory over Nazi Germany.” There
had been earlier speculation that the aerial parade would include both
the Su-57 multirole fighter jet and Russia’s new S-70 heavy attack UAV
“Hunter.” However, as the TASS excerpt indicates, while “a wing of four
fifth-generation Su-57 multirole fighter jets” was included in the parade,
there was no sign of the S-70 UAV. The duo had made their debut back
in September 2019, when, as the second excerpt recalls, “a flight was
performed in automated mode: the interaction between Okhotnik [Hunter
UAV] and the Su-57 was successfully worked out.” This excerpt, from
the pro-Kremlin site, Polit-Rossiya, quotes military commentator Viktor
S-70 Okhotnik.
Source: TerHussein via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=81104025, CC BY-SA 4.0
Baranets, who asserts that in the future, the Hunter UAV will be equipped
with “dagger hypersonic missiles.” To date, however, the Russian military has yet to field any attack UAV.
The third excerpt from the military weekly, Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, provides additional background on what might be delaying the
fielding of this heavy UAV. It reminds readers that “the plans of the military department to field an attack UAV of this class were announced at the
MAKS air show in August 2009.” This excerpt suggests that because of the UAV’s heavy weight (approximately 20 tons), combined with its design
(“tailless flying-wing aircraft”) the delays behind fielding may be caused by “aerodynamic instability.” The author concludes on a pessimistic note,
bemoaning the fact that Russia has yet to field an attack UAV, which he claims could be the result of “military-political miscalculations, lack of
scientific forecasting or elementary corruption.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“In the future we should also expect to equip unmanned aerial
vehicles with hypersonic weapons...”
Source: “Russia holds air parade over Moscow’s Red Square on Victory Day,” TASS, 9 May 2020. https://tass.com/defense/1154697
A parade formation of 75 helicopters and aircraft flew over Moscow’s Red Square to mark the 75th anniversary of the Soviet Union’s Victory over Nazi Germany in the 1941-1945 Great
Patriotic War, TASS reported from the scene…. After that, four MiG-31K interceptor-fighters carrying Kinzhal air-launched hypersonic missiles appeared in the skies over Moscow
together with a wing of 4 fifth-generation Su-57 multirole fighter jets.

Source: Victor Butkevich “Полковник Баранец рассказал об оснащении С-70 ‘Охотник’ гиперзвуковым ‘Кинжалом’ (Colonel Baranets
spoke about equipping the S-70 Hunter with a hypersonic Dagger),” Polit-Rossiya, 11 May 2020. https://politros.com/165952-polkovnikbaranec-rasskazal-ob-osnashenii-s-70-okhotnik-giperzvukovym-kinzhalom
Test launches of dagger hypersonic missiles from the T-22M3 took place in Russia. However, the Russian military will not stop there and in the future, the latest weapons can be
installed on the S-70 Okhotnik heavy attack unmanned bomber. This opinion was expressed in a conversation with PolitRussia by retired colonel Viktor Baranets, a military observer for
Komsomolskaya Pravda…. Baranets noted, in the future we should also expect to equip unmanned aerial vehicles with hypersonic weapons. “I believe this will be done when we launch
our heavy drone “Hunter,” which is now in the testing phase…. The S-70 Hunter is a Russian heavy strike UAV, which is being developed by the Sukhoi Company. The unmanned bomber,
made according to the “flying wing” design, made its first flight in August 2019. Later, a flight was performed in an automated mode: the interaction between Hunter and an S-57 was
successfully worked out…

Source: Oleg Falichev, “Сможет ли охотиться ‘Охотник’? (Will the Hunter be able to hunt?),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (VPK), 13
April 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/56451
The latest attack UAV could become a suitcase without a handle for the Russian army.
For the first time, the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation published on the network a video of the first flight of the prototype of the latest UAV “Hunter” on August 7,
2019. A heavy attack drone of the “flying wing” type then flew over the Chkalov State Flight Test Center in Astrakhan and landed at the airport. After that, information about it in the
media practically disappeared. Two conclusions can be drawn. The UAV is classified and do not want to “expose” ahead of time. Or, it revealed significant shortcomings that must be
eliminated…. In any case, both versions only fuel interest in this mysterious novelty of Russian military-technical equipment.
S-70 Hunter is a Russian Sukhoi heavy unmanned bomber. The plans of the military department to get in service with an attack UAV of this class were announced at the MAKS air show
in August 2009….
…On August 3, 2019, Hunter made its first flight, which lasted more than 20 minutes. Under the control of the operator, he flew over the airfield at an altitude of about 600 meters and
made a successful landing. On September 27, 2019, the Russian Ministry of Defense reported to the media about the first joint flight of the Hunter and the Su-57 fighter, which lasted more
than 30 minutes. An unmanned aircraft flew in an automated mode. Then, in the sky between the UAV and the leader aircraft, interaction was worked out to expand the fighter’s radar
field and target designation for the use of long-range aviation weapons without the Su-57 entering the conditional anti-aircraft defense zone….
There are still no open accurate data on this subject. The project is classified. And yet, something became known. Presumably, the “Hunter” has a mass of about 20 tons.
…The fact is that tailless flying-wing aircraft are often characterized by aerodynamic instability…
It’s hard to say when the Hunter UAV will go hunting…. Why are there still no small and medium shock drones in the Russian Federation…What is the reason: in military-political
miscalculations, lack of scientific forecasting or elementary corruption?

OE Watch | June 2020

3

EURASIA
Alternate Medical Service for Russian Draftees
OE Watch Commentary: Like many other countries, Russia continues to struggle with the challenges stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic.
All sectors of society, to include the military, have been enlisted to help reduce the threat of infection and to provide medical care to the ill (see:
“Constructing Multifunctional Medical Centers to Combat Coronavirus,” OE Watch, May 2020). Perhaps it was just fortuitous timing, but according
to the accompanying excerpt from the pro-Kremlin daily, Izvestia, Defense Ministry officials recently announced that young Russian men who opt
for Alternative Civilian Service (AGS) in lieu of being trained as a soldier, will soon be able to “be trained in the paramedic profession,” and elect
to serve “within the civilian structures or the Defense Ministry system.”
Since the early 1990s, Russia has allowed young men who hold pacifist views, the option of completing their conscription requirement outside of
military service. As the excerpt points out, selecting this option has not been very popular, with only a few hundred young men choosing AGS each
draft cycle. Not only is the process convoluted, filled with bureaucratic hurdles, and generally frowned upon by defense officials, but prospective
candidates are required to serve 21 months instead of the normal 12-month conscription period.
The excerpt suggests that the military’s attitude toward those recruits who select AGS may be changing. The article quotes an expert who asserts
that “working in the medical field is an important and honorable deed,” pointing out that “the spread of coronavirus infection has shown that
medical professionals are still at the forefront, in the hospitals, fighting for the lives of thousands of people.” The military also plans to reduce the
time commitment for those choosing AGS from 21 to 18 months.
Even with serious national concerns over the spread of COVID-19, the Kremlin leadership elected to go forward with the Spring 2020 conscription
campaign. In a roundabout way, allowing future draftees the option of AGS and being trained as a paramedic, may help to stem the spread of the
coronavirus within the military. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Working in the medical field is an important and honorable deed…”
Source: Roman Kretcul, Bogdan Stepovoi, Aleksei Ramm, “Санитарный призыв: в РФ меняют правила прохождения альтернативной
службы (Sanitary Draft: Russian Federation Changes Alternative Service Rules),” Izvestia, 16 April 2020. https://iz.ru/996298/roman-kretculbogdan-stepovoi-aleksei-ramm/sanitarnyi-prizyv-v-rf-meniaiut-pravila-prokhozhdeniia-alternativnoi-sluzhby
New Alternative Civilian Service (AGS) rules are being introduced in the country. It is planned that, as soon as in 2021, the draftees opting
for AGS will be able to serve through the Defense Ministry channel. The young people will be trained in the paramedic profession at the
Russian Federation Armed Forces Main Temple Military Spiritual and Educational Center base. Afterwards, the draftees will be dispatched
to serve in medical institutions, Izvestiya’s sources in the Defense Ministry reported. Their service term will be reduced from 21 to 18 months,
unlike those who serve their AGS in civil structures.
Previously, the young men whose believes forbid taking up arms, served only in civil establishments -- as paramedics, social workers, and so
on. They now have the opportunity to serve the Motherland within the military department system. As such, they will have no need carry an
assault rifle….
The option to choose civilian service instead of the military one became available for the Russian draftees in the early 1990s. There were no
mechanisms for implementing this option at the time, and the young men, who had applied for the AGS, sometimes waited for years until a
service place was allocated for them. Some treated this option as an opportunity to legally evade military service, by stretching the time up to
the end of the draft age.
Today, the list of professions available for those choosing the alternative serve already numbers dozens of positions. These, for instance,
include: a woodworker, a driver, a welder, a postman, an elevator operator, a house painter, a tractor operator, a paramedic, a gate-keeper, a
gardener, a reindeer herder, a baker, a fireman, etc.
…However, this service is not very popular. There are only several hundred draftees opting for the AGS every six months, while
approximately 130,000-135,000 draftees in the same time period choose the military service.
The service term for those choosing the AGS through the Defense Ministry channel will be reduced to 18 months. After training, they will be
dispatched for service in medical institutions….
…Colonel Aleksandr Perendzhiyev, the Associate Professor at the Plekhanov REU [Russian University of Economics], is also confident that
the young men serving the AGS can be very useful to the country and the society. “Working in the medical field is an important and honorable
deed,” the expert told Izvestiya. “The world is changing, and the situation with the spread of coronavirus infection has shown that medical
professionals are still at the forefront, in the hospitals, fighting for the lives of thousands of people.”
…It is also important for the draftees to keep in mind that certain restrictions will apply to the citizens who have opted for alternative service,
when they are processed for government jobs.
OE Watch | June 2020

4

EURASIA
Inside Russia: Spreading Virus Disinformation Narratives
OE Watch Commentary: In Russia, as in many other countries, COVID-19 has exposed weaknesses within the country’s medical system. The
Kremlin’s optimistic forecasts from a few months ago have been replaced with sobering statistics, frantic construction of new medical facilities,
and continued social restriction measures. As the country continues to struggle in stopping the spread of the virus and addressing its economic
consequences, the perennial question as to “Who is guilty?” (кто виноват?) has surfaced. Not surprisingly, as the title of the accompanying article
from the popular daily Komsomolskaya Pravda insinuates (“Does the US surround Russia with secret bio labs in order to infect us with a new
virus?”), it is clear which country many Russians find most responsible.
The article begins by describing how “around... Russian borders, 33 US medical centers are concentrated, where secret biological developments
are underway.” These laboratories, which were developed after the end of the Cold War to assist the former Soviet republics with their health needs,
have now been transformed by articles like this into the primary perpetrator of any disease. Filled with innuendo and conspiratorial analysis, the
article attributes every infectious outbreak over the past 20 years in this region to these US labs, going so far as to suggest that by maintaining
labs in countries around Russia, the US will be able to infect Russia via “migrant workers.” It includes comments from an alleged “expert,” who
implies that pandemics are part of US strategy, asserting that “viruses will be used to destabilize the country, undermine its economy and change
power. This is how the idea and technology of the ‘color revolutions’ was successfully used.”
This article is not an outlier, but rather represents a central theme in the many faceted Kremlin campaign to both divert criticism of its own
performance and to “prove” once again that the US will stop at nothing to weaken Russia. A vaccine for COVID-19 will ultimately be developed,
but as this article indicates, it may take much longer to reverse anti-American sentiments in Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Around... Russian borders, 33 US medical centers are concentrated,
where secret biological developments are underway…”
Source: Dmitry Steshin, “США окружают Россию секретными биолабораториями, чтобы забросить нам новый вирус? (Does the US
surround Russia with secret bio labs in order to infect us with a new virus?),” Komsomolskaya Pravda, 29 April 2020. https://www.kp.ru/
daily/27126/4208473/
…Around the Russian borders, 33 US medical centers are concentrated, where secret biological developments are underway
…Indeed, after the collapse of the USSR, such laboratories began to grow in the newly formed republics, like mushrooms. What they were doing was
of little interest until the terrible documents about research in a similar US laboratory near Tbilisi fell into the hands of the former Minister of State
Security of Georgia…. Now, Igor Giorgadze lives in Russia as a political refugee…. According to him, the Americans began to agree on the creation of
a biolaboratory in Georgia under Shevardnadze, in the early 2000s. And they built and opened a strange laboratory, the activity of which was able to
activate, under Saakashvili, in 2003-11….
In 2018, Giorgadze passed creepy documents from this laboratory. For example, a register of deaths during research. December 2015 - 30 dead in a
month, 24 people died in one day. April 2016 - 30 dead, August - 16 dead. In the column “cause of death” - “not established”. Surnames of the dead are
unknown - medical secret. Some kind of “ factory of death” ...
…Of course, Giorgadze made this information public. And then a scandal also began. But scandals in today’s world do not live long, everyone forgot
about this story. But two years later, there was a worldwide pandemic of the still unexplored virus. Therefore, the KP special correspondent contacted the
ex-Minister of State Security of Georgia….
- Igor Panteleimonovich, was there any official and political reaction to your investigation? Inside Georgia, in the West, in Russia?
“…By strange coincidence, it is from these countries that the main stream of migrant workers goes to Russia…. With such a density of biological centers
monitoring safety, Uzbekistan has experienced several strange epidemics since 2011, and the diseases remain unknown…”
“…And the concern of Ukrainian opposition deputies, who noticed strange laboratories, was caused not only by the current coronavirus pandemic, but
also by local outbreaks of incomprehensible diseases of recent years. For example, in 2016, immediately 20 Ukrainian troops died from a virus similar to
the flu. Another 200 people were hospitalized….”
It is easy to guess why the US biolaboratory is clinging to the borders of Russia. They need local material for research. But why? Really, someone in their
right mind is able to start a biological war? Logic says yes. Total, unlikely, but local - completely. And I asked Igor Giorgadze a question that tormented
me, which there was especially no one to ask:
- Is there any common sense in the assumption that this belt of laboratories is preparation for a war that will take place in unprecedented, previously
unknown forms?
“…Viruses will be used to destabilize the country, undermine its economy and change power. This is how the idea and technology of the “color
revolutions” was successfully used. The state did not seem to collapse, but the power changed radically ...”
“I believe that the Third World War began immediately after the Second,” Giorgadze replied. - In 1991, the first goal of the Third World War was
achieved, they destroyed the USSR, they celebrated the victory. But the war continues, only against Russia. And this war is changing its form. Analyzing
today’s events, I note that even if the spread of this virus was not specifically planned, it turned out to be realistic to use the pandemic in their tactical and
strategic plans…. Therefore, we can consider the pandemic as one of the scenarios of the Third World War, a prologue or rehearsal - this version cannot
be discarded….

OE Watch | June 2020

5

EURASIA
Faith and Russian Military Victory
OE Watch Commentary: Coronavirus concerns
have delayed the opening and dedication of the new
Main Cathedral of the Russian Armed Forces located
in Patriot Park, about an hour outside of Moscow.
Once these concerns abate, this huge cathedral will be
dedicated to the Soviet Union’s victory in the “Great
Fatherland War” (WW II) where it will serve as an apt
metaphor for a current Russian perspective regarding
faith and military power.
While the USSR was officially atheist, some Russians
today credit their WW II victory to divine intercession.
The accompanying excerpt, from an article in
the normally agnostic military weekly, VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer, describes a number of military
incidents from WW II (and later) where “faith helped
German soldiers defending Konigsberg, January, 1945.
Source: Bundesarchiv, Bild 183-R98401 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bundesarchiv_Bild_183fighters in the most hopeless situations.” The author
R98401,_K%C3%B6nigsberg,_Volkssturm.jpg, CC-BY-SA 3.0
begins by describing the challenges the Soviet military
faced toward the end of the war, when trying to “storm Konigsberg [Kaliningrad] in April 1945,” emphasizing the many layers of defense which
protected this stronghold. He asserts that “there are things in the story of the capture of Konigsberg that are hard for a materialist to believe,”
relating how shortly before the Nazi capitulation, a “religious procession moving along the front line” forced the “Nazis suddenly [to] drop their
weapons and…run away.” Later, when the Soviets broke through, they asked a captured soldier why they had stopped shooting, and the German
“replied ‘the weapon refused.’”
The author goes on to describe “many other stories of miraculous salvation during the years of the great war,” questioning “how do we, raised
in the spirit of militant atheism, relate to them? Everyone has the right to draw conclusions.” The author’s answers point to divine intervention. He
recounts other recent examples which he attributes to providence, for instance, recalling that during the funeral ceremony “honoring the Kursk
crew, seagulls appeared in the sky (185 kilometers to the coast) and the rays of the sun broke through the cloudy horizon.” The author concludes
the article by asserting that even though “the buckles of the belts of Hitler’s soldiers were stamped with the words ‘God with us,’… the Lord,
according to veterans of the Great Patriotic War, was on the side of the Red Army… [because] God is always on the side of those who serve and
fight for a just cause.”
Not that long ago, when describing the outcome of previous conflicts, Soviet historians would often point to Marxist-Leninist teachings for an
explanation. Soviet military victories (to include WW II) reflected the veracity and inevitability of the communist cause. Since that ideology has
been largely discredited, some Russian writers have adopted a new existential formula to explain their victories. End OE Watch Commentary
(Finch)

“The buckles of the belts of Hitler’s soldiers were stamped with

the words ‘God with us,’… but the Lord, according to veterans of
the Great Patriotic War, was on the side of the Red Army…”

OE Watch | June 2020

6

EURASIA
Continued: Faith and Russian Military Victory

Model of Russia’s Main Military Cathedral.

Source: Russian Federation Defence Ministry, http://mil.ru/et/news/more.htm?id=12206176@egNews, CCA SA 4.0 Intl

Source: Valery Gromak, “С кем был Бог (Who was God with),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 13 April 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/
articles/56444
Faith helped fighters in the most hopeless situations.
About the storm of Konigsberg in April 1945, many bright pages were written. But few people know that our soldiers took the impregnable
fortress city thanks to courage and heroism, but also with ... God’s help.
The Germans began the construction of well-developed, long-term engineering structures on the territory of East Prussia in 1932 and
continued to develop them before the attack on the Soviet Union. After the defeat at Stalingrad in 1943, the Nazis intensely resumed this
construction…. As a result, a number of modern fortified areas were created in the Konigsberg area, including engineering-friendly frontal
and cut-off positions. Large defense nodes were saturated with long-term structures….
There are things in the story of the capture of Konigsberg that are hard for a materialist to believe…. On April 7, at the Annunciation, they
were waiting for the battle and suddenly saw a religious procession moving along the front line, Orthodox priests walking at the head of the
column carry the Kazan Icon of the Mother of God with chants befitting the moment. And then something unbelievable happened. Seeing the
procession, the Nazis suddenly dropped their weapons… They took Konigsberg with God’s help… When the captured German was asked why
they had stopped shooting, he replied: ‘The weapon refused.’
…There were many stories of miraculous salvation during the years of the great war…. How do we, raised in the spirit of militant atheism,
relate to them? Everyone has the right to draw conclusions…. I will bring two more stories that I myself have witnessed…. Something similar
happened during the laying of the Orthodox cross and wreaths at the point of death of the Kursk nuclear submarine… After honoring the
Kursk crew, seagulls appeared in the sky (185 kilometers to the coast) and the rays of the sun broke through the cloudy horizon. For many
non-religious people, this has become a landmark.
On the buckles of the belts of Hitler’s soldiers the words “God with us” were stamped. But the Lord, according to veterans of the Great
Patriotic War, was on the side of the Red Army, its soldiers and commanders. God is always on the side of those who serve a just cause and
fight for a just cause.
OE Watch | June 2020

7

EURASIA
Chinese Help to Restore the Kuznetsov
OE Watch Commentary: Much has been written
over the past several years regarding the improved
relations between Russia and China, particularly in
the military realm. This relationship became ever
more important for the Kremlin leadership after
its aggression against Ukraine and subsequent
sanctions from Western countries. Having been
restricted from accessing key markets in the west,
Russia has increasingly looked east for trade and the
acquisition of essential products. The accompanying
excerpt from the Colonel Cassad blog site describes
how China plans to provide Russia with both the
necessary equipment and personnel expertise to
help repair Russia’s sole, much beleaguered aircraft
carrier, Admiral Kuznetsov.

The Admiral Kuznetsov in 2012.

Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Admiral_Kuznetsov_aircraft_carrier.jp,g CCA 4.0 Intl

As described last month (see: “No Dock for the
Kuznetsov?” OE Watch, May 2020), Russian plans to construct a new dock to repair this carrier have run aground, and as the excerpt points out,
“Russia is powerless to change this situation [on its own], since the design and construction of an aircraft carrier is a very complex process, and
Russia does not have auxiliary equipment and even modern shipyards.” Enter China. The article describes how “Russia has ordered a 1,000-ton
gantry crane and an 800-ton crane in China, and China will also send appropriate technical personnel to participate in the construction of the
Russian shipyard.”
While there is no mention of what this assistance will cost, the article does suggest that China is not about to make such a gift, pointing out that
“it’s better to teach a person how to fish than just give him one.” The article concludes with rich hyperbole regarding the brotherly warmth between
the two countries, asserting that this deal “also allows Russia to understand the correct choice of China as a partner,” and that “relations between
China and Russia are a bit like gentlemen’s relations - simple and pragmatic.” One comment from a Russian helps to balance such hyperbole:
“China has no partners, only satellites. Partnership is only between equals.” End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“China’s actions show its sincerity, and this also allows Russia to
understand the correct choice of China as a partner…”
Source: “Понять правильность выбора Китая в качестве партнера (Understand the correct choice of China as a partner),” Colonel Cassad
blog, 14 May 2020. https://colonelcassad.livejournal.com/5867053.html#cutid1
The Chinese boast that they will help Russia with the equipment and personnel for the new Russian shipyard, where large-capacity ships are to be built.
At a crucial moment, China gave Russia a generous gift. The Russian Navy is very pleased. It is worth making friends with such a partner….
…The Russian Navy has not received new warships for a long time. The only aircraft carrier, Admiral Kuznetsov, was damaged and cannot be used
during operations. Therefore, under the double pressure of external concerns and internal problems, Russia began to actively cooperate with China,
trying to turn the tide. The giant energy agreements reached between China and Russia last year are of great importance for Russia’s economic
development.
As you know, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian Navy inherited only one aircraft carrier - Admiral Kuznetsov. Today, this already
insufficiently powerful veteran cannot satisfy the needs of the Russian Navy at all. Russia is powerless to change this situation [on its own], since the
design and construction of an aircraft carrier is a very complex process, and Russia does not have auxiliary equipment and even modern shipyards.
However, at present, Russia has ordered a 1,000-ton gantry crane and an 800-ton crane in China, and China will also send appropriate technical
personnel to participate in the construction of the Russian shipyard. As the old proverb says: “It’s better to teach a person how to fish than just give him
one.” At the same time, China’s actions show its sincerity, and this also allows Russia to understand the correct choice of China as a partner.
In fact, relations between China and Russia are a bit like gentlemen’s relations - simple and pragmatic. We cannot ignore each other’s real difficulties.
This year marks 70 years since the establishment of Sino-Russian diplomatic relations. I hope that through the joint efforts of the two countries the world
can become more peaceful and stable in the new year!
Reader Comment: nelson654
China has no partners, only satellites. Partnership is only between equals…

OE Watch | June 2020

8

EURASIA
Toward a “System of Regional Security in the Arctic”: A
Russian Perspective
OE Watch Commentary: In a recent article from the Russian
Ministry of Defense’s journal, Military Thought, on the subject of
military security in the Arctic, one Russian General Staff analyst
noted a paradox: There were many nations and organizations
with Arctic development interests but no “functioning…regional
security system.” The article’s main purposes are to outline the
“disintegrated…and artificially muddled” nature of the various
entities’ relationships and to spotlight the existing Arctic Council
as the premier institution to develop a cooperative regime, which
the author, Colonel O. Gavrilov, labels a “System of Regional
Security in the Arctic” (abbreviated from Russian language as
“ASRS”).
The article helpfully lists various leading organizations,
including five Arctic states, three sub-Arctic states, EU countries
(that border on Arctic regions), NATO member states (that border
on Arctic regions), the Arctic Council (which are the eight Arctic
and sub-Arctic states), the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, the
Nordic Council of Ministers, Nordic Defense Cooperation, and the Complex expedition to the North Pole, organized by the Expedition Centre of the
Russian Defence Ministry, 20 April 2017.
Asia Forum of Polar Research. The article also notes but does not
Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, https://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12119454@
egNews, CCA 4.0
fully list that there are 20 other nongovernmental organizations
associated with the Arctic.
Gavrilov describes a contradiction between this large cast of Arctic-interested parties to the collective “muddle” in terms of Arctic security and
security policy. Besides a litany of anti-Russian positions and actions that he catalogs from the various actors, he particularly offers the criticism
that the Arctic Council—one of only two that Russia belongs to—currently “does not take up issues of military security.” However, he sees in that
organization, comprised of Russia, USA, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, Sweden, and Finland, a less-muddled deficiency that if corrected
with an ASRS could “act as a regulator of international relations and reduce the level of dangers and threats” and would benefit Russia in terms of
its military-political policies. He breaks down the ASRS into 24 “manifestations of regularities,” or establishing principles. These are not detailed
requirements of what the ASRS would look like or should do, rather the list is a seemingly esoterically range principles of an ASRS designed
to “unite existing views” of the participating entities and save them “from serious errors.” These foundational concepts include such things as
“Communicativeness” to “Historicity” to “Tolerance” to “Goal-setting.” The “forms and methods”—a signaling term of the Russian General
Staff—states that the ASRS’s objectives should “stay within the international law field.”
While this article does not develop the details of the ASRS enough for outside predictive insight into specific Russian General Staff plans
for the Arctic, it, nevertheless, shows one likely approach that will be explored through their military science. And this is not unexpected. The
way the General Staff sees it at this point, the current status quo favors the Russian military in the Arctic and an ASRS would promote Russian
national interest and a more calculable way for Russia to maintain its leading position in the militarization of the Arctic region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wilhelm)

“One has to admit with regret that at the moment
this kind of universally recognized system [Arctic
regional security system] does not exist, and this is
the main problem of the Arctic region.”
Source: EO. Gavrilov, “The Condition and Development Prospects of a Regional Security System in the Arctic, Military Thought (in English),
Vol. 28, No. 3 (2019), pp. 1-19.
“…many contradictions between Arctic and sub-Arctic countries nowadays fail to be properly settled. In this context, it appears expedient to outline the
principle political mechanisms of uncovering dangers and threats in the Arctic…
Above all, it is necessary to point out that the Arctic region now boasts a fairly well formed system of international relations…
…The presence of so large a number of international organizations on the Arctic suggests that the region is of special interest to many states, and even
more importantly, that the system of relationships among them is intricate, disintegrated, and artificially muddled.”

OE Watch | June 2020

9

EURASIA
Looking Beyond China: Asian Actors in the Russian Arctic
(Part One)
by Sergey Sukhankin
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol: 17, Issue: 64, dated 7 May 2020. For the full article,
see: https://jamestown.org/program/looking-beyond-china-asian-actors-in-the-russian-arctic-part-one/

OE Watch Commentary: Among the non-Arctic states seeking partnership with Russia as a means to increase their presence in the northern
polar region, China has become by far the most visible player. Yet, other emerging actors—India and Japan—should also be noted. (This is the
first of a two-part series that addresses Asian actors in the Russian Arctic. While Part One deals with India, Part Two will focus on Japan.)
On 14 January, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov claimed that New Delhi and Moscow are tightening cooperation in the development of
Arctic-based oil and natural gas projects. This information was confirmed by Indian Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas Dharmendra Pradhan.
Following these statements, Russian state-owned petroleum giant Rosneft concluded an agreement with Indian Oil, envisaging the latter’s annual
procurement of two million tons of crude from the Russian High North. Other Indian energy firms, including Hindustan Petroleum and Bharat
Petroleum, were also reportedly negotiating contracts with Rosneft.
More far-reaching news arrived on 5 February, when, following negotiations in New Delhi with Rosneft CEO Igor Sechin, Minister Pradhan
announced that Indian companies would be joining the Vostok Oil extraction project. Expected to begin operations in 2024, Vostok Oil (according
to Rosneft) will be pivotal in transforming the Russian Arctic by contributing to the development of 15 new industry towns in the region, two
airports and a seaport, as well creating at least 100,000 new jobs. The main strategic advantage of this project is its geographic proximity to the
Northern Sea Route (NSR)—Russia’s much-hyped east-west maritime transportation corridor (under continued development), which hugs the
country’s Arctic coast and is anticipated to become an engine of Russian economic growth for decades to come.
The involvement of India in Vostok Oil was motivated by two important aspects. First, despite its geographic remoteness from the region, India is
gradually becoming an important Arctic player in its own right. The first signs of interest emerged between 2007 and 2008, when India conducted
its first scientific expedition to the Arctic and then established the Himadri Station at Svalbard. India managed to secure Observer status in the
Arctic Council (AC) on 12 May 2013, an event celebrated as New Delhi’s “Arctic victory.” And in 2015, during his visit to Moscow, Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi noted the strategic importance of India’s presence in the AC, acknowledging the “high cooperative potential of IndianRussian ties in the Arctic region.” As a non-Arctic state—and thus unable to participate in local affairs unilaterally—but strategically interested in
cultivating a regional presence, India will have to closely cooperate with Russia. Its involvement in the Vostok Oil project appears to underscore
this approach.
Second, Indian interest in the Arctic region—initially limited to pursuing scientific research—is progressively acquiring visible geo-economic
features. This trend is inseparable from Modi’s strategic aim of achieving energy security for India through the diversification of energy suppliers.
Russia, with its vast Arctic resources, is deemed one of the main elements of this Indian energy strategy. It acquired concrete shape between 2014
and 2018, when Indian corporations, including ONGC Videsh, and the political leaderships of the two countries signed a series of agreements/
memoranda pertaining to the intensification of their partnership in the Arctic region via cooperation on oil and gas projects there. The fifth Eastern
Economic Forum (EEF), hosted in Vladivostok on 4-6 September 2019, became an important milestone, when the Russian side specifically
“invited” the Indians to take part in its Arctic projects. Importantly, several days prior to the summit, Pradhan argued that India is interested in
establishing an “energy bridge” with Russia—an initiative premised on three main types of energy resources to be imported from Russia:
– Oil (primarily concerned with Vankor-based oil deposits), which is to be managed by such Indian corporations as ОNGC, Oil India, Indian Oil
Corporation as well as Bharat Petroresources.
– Liquefied natural gas (LNG—from Yamal-based deposits and the Arctic LNG-2 project), whose consumption in India has increased exponentially.
Incidentally, Indian scholars have argued that for India to optimize its LNG consumption and import scheme, the country should study Chinese and
German cooperation with Russia.
– Coal (a strategically important commodity for the Indian steel industry), whose imports are to be managed by such Indian corporations as
Tata, SAIL, NMDC and Jindal.
However, this excessively promising picture needs to be supplemented by several factors that could affect Russian-Indian cooperation in the High
North going forward.

(Continued)

OE Watch | June 2020

10

EURASIA
Continued: Looking Beyond China: Asian Actors in the
Russian Arctic (Part One)
First is the sensitive issue of the “internationalization” of the Arctic. While Russia maintains that the Arctic must remain “for Arctic countries,”
India sees the region as a part of a global heritage. For Moscow, this narrative represents a strategic threat to its national interests.
Second is the “Chinese factor,” premised on two pillars. On the one hand, India sees Chinese advancements into the region as a strategic threat:
in addition to geo-economic and geopolitical calculations, growing Chinese activities there are likely to further pollute the Arctic and speed up
adverse climactic changes with global repercussions that can be expected to have a detrimental effect on India. Moreover, India, which supports
the denuclearization and demilitarization of the region, has serious concerns over potential Chinese attempts to increase its military involvement
north of the Arctic Circle. On the other hand, India feels ill at ease with the development of the Northern Sea Route, which could dramatically
diminish the role of the Indian Ocean as a transportation artery between East and West, and at the same time redraw the balance of power between
India and China. Namely, a year-round functional NSR with sufficient capacity will remove New Delhi’s ostensible ability at present to (in case of
a bilateral conflict) block vessels to and from China passing through the Indian Ocean and the Straits of Malacca carrying strategically important
resources and raw materials.
Finally, despite Indian involvement in Russian-backed Arctic projects, New Delhi does not share Moscow’s utilitarian stance on the Arctic due
to the former’s potential ecological and climate concerns. Furthermore, inexpensive oil, which seems to be the new long-term reality, could make
India more cautious about investing in expensive Arctic oil or LNG projects. End OE Watch Commentary (Sukhankin)

Over the years, FMSO has studied and written about foreign perspectives on pandemics. One example is below. For more
information on previous FMSO work on pandemics including Ebola, search OE Watch issues:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Avian Influenza: Potential Impact on Sub-Saharan Military Populations
with High Rates of Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
By Robert Feldman and Kent Nickell
Before COVID-19 grabbed all of the headlines, health officials were also looking at several
other diseases that could potentially reach pandemic level. One of these was H5N1,
commonly known as avian influenza or bird flu. This article, which originally appeared
in Military Medicine, discusses the possibility that in people infected with both H5N1
and HIV, the AIDS from HIV might suppress the immune reaction to allow further
mutation of H5N1 to occur, with a possible disease outbreak from the new strain to follow.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/200034

OE Watch | June 2020

11

EURASIA
Russian Airborne Troops Conduct High Altitude Arctic
Parachute Drop
OE Watch Commentary: The first accompanying
passage from Nezavisimaya Gazeta discusses
an airborne operation in Arctic conditions that
entailed soldiers of an Airborne Troops elite subunit
conducting a high-altitude jump from 10,000 meters
(32,808 feet) and landing at the designated area
“with precision accuracy.” Personnel of the 45th
Guards Spetsnaz Brigade apparently took this highaltitude Arctic jump in stride. As the passage notes,
the Arablet-2 steerable parachute proved its worth
as did the cold-weather gear manufactured by the
Kalashnikov factories. The paratroopers’ mission
was to protect an isolated Russian air-defense site.
As the second passage discusses, after landing in the
snow, the paratroopers began the main stage of the
tactical and special exercise including reconnaissance
and search operations.
As the first passage notes, the goal of the exercise
was to “defend the Russian infrastructure in the For the first time in world history, Russian paratroopers made a landing as part of a group on
new parachute systems from a height of 10,000 meters in arctic conditions.
region from outside aggression and to rehearse
Source: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, http://eng.mil.ru/en/multimedia/photo/gallery.htm?id=75731@cmsPhotoGallery, CCA 4.0
an evacuation,” also pointing out that “Denmark,
Canada, Norway, Iceland, Sweden, Finland, the US, and even China are competing for the Arctic.”
The “Arctic Trefoil” refers to the shape of the large self-contained living and working facility completed in 2017. Two of Russia’s legendary
paratroopers, Deputy Defense Minister Lieutenant General Yunus-Bek Yevkurov and Deputy Defense Minister, Colonel-General Andrei Serdyukov,
Commander of the Airborne Forces observed the jump. Readers may remember General Yevkurov for his 12 June 1999, 500-kilometer march to
seize the Pristina International Airport ahead of NATO forces to ensure a Russian presence in Kosovo after the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia.
End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Today, we have conducted a group air insertion of personnel on
the new special purpose parachute system in the Arctic from an
altitude of 10,000 meters with the use of oxygen equipment and the
subsequent accomplishment of the combat training missions for the
first time in world history. No one has ever done that prior to us....
This is General of the Army Sergey Shoygu’s direct order and we
have successfully accomplished it.”
-Deputy Defense Minister Yunus-Bek Yevkurov

OE Watch | June 2020

12

EURASIA
Continued: Russian Airborne Troops Conduct High
Altitude Arctic Parachute Drop
Source: Unattributed, “Арктический трилистник” защитили Арбалетом (They defended an Arctic Trefoil with a Crossbow),” Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, 27 April 2020. http://www.ng.ru/armies/2020-04-27/8_7854_arctic.html
They defended an Arctic Trefoil with a Crossbow
The “Arbalet-2” [crossbow-2] parachute system and “Kalashnikov” Concern’s new equipment permitted the conduct of an airborne operation in Arctic conditions.
From an altitude of 10 kilometers, the soldiers of an Airborne Troops elite subunit from Moscow’s Kubinka landed at the designated area with precision accuracy and
conducted exercises to block a foreign state’s special forces team alongside an “Arctic Trefoil” military base on the Franz Josef Land Archipelago. This is one of six
strategic facilities, which the Ministry of Defense has deployed along the Northern Maritime Route that is strategically important for Russia. It not only ensures the
security of merchant shipping in arctic waters but also serves as an outpost, which forces back the employment line of American “Tomahawk” cruise missiles. These
missiles will be able to reach the positions of our most state-of-the-art “Sarmat” strategic nuclear missiles, which will be deployed near Orenburg.
“Today, we have conducted a group air insertion of personnel on the new special purpose parachute system in the Arctic from an altitude of 10,000 meters with the
use of oxygen equipment and the subsequent accomplishment of the combat training missions for the first time in world history. No one has ever done that prior to us”,
Deputy Defense Minister Yunus-Bek Yevkurov reported. “This is General of the Army Sergey Shoygu’s direct order and we have successfully accomplished it.”
Denmark, Canada, Norway, Iceland, Sweden, Finland, the US, and even China are competing for the Arctic. Each of these countries has its own reasons. According
to the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Arctic states possess the sovereign right to develop the mineral resources within the exclusive economic zones
that belong to them. This is 200 nautical miles from the coast and 350 nautical miles - from the continental shelf…. Russia resorted to preventive measures to secure
its right to the possession of the territories along its coast in the Arctic Zone. Six military bases are deployed there today: on Kotelnyy Island (the Novosibirsk Islands),
Aleksandra Land (part of the Franz Josef Land Archipelago), Sredniy (Severnaya Zemlya), and also in the Village of Rogachevo (Novaya Zemlya), on Mys Shmidt (Cape
Schmidt), and on Wrangel Island (part of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug). Besides these, there are more than a dozen military airfields, air defense missile systems’
positions, and military ports here. This entire infrastructure operates round-the-clock.
The “Arctic Trefoil” is located at the entrance from the European Portion of the Continent to Asia. Approximately 150 Russian…servicemen are working autonomously
there. Contact with the mainland is limited by sea conditions and the capabilities of Military Transport Aviation. But they are not subject totally to the will of nature.
VDV [Airborne Troops] exercises just demonstrated this. They did not simply conduct a landing from a record altitude of 10,000 meters but also demonstrated this type
of troops’ new capabilities for combat in adverse climatic conditions.
All of the paratroopers completed special training at the VDV 309th Special Parachute Training Center in Ryazan. All of them were equipped with special
breathing masks for high altitudes. Their descent onto the ice used the latest “Arbalet-2” parachute systems. They were developed to meet the requirements of VDV
reconnaissance and special subunits. They allow paratroopers to jump from all types of military transport aircraft and helicopters at speeds of up to 400 kilometers
per hour. These parachutes can handle additional equipment exceeding two times a paratrooper’s body weight. The paratroopers had new Arctic clothing and survival
gear which allows them to function for a long time in the unfavorable arctic weather.
This is not the VDV’s first experience in airborne assaults in the Arctic. They began in 2014. At that time, as now, an airborne assault force landed on drift ice. The goal
of the exercise was the same - to defend the Russian infrastructure in the region from outside aggression and to rehearse an evacuation. The complexity of the event
increased because the military personnel parachuted onto an unprepared landing zone. Navigation instruments and communication gear operate poorly near the North
Pole and the weather changes frequently. Nevertheless, the VDV accomplished their assigned mission. The second phase had difficulties as the weather deterioration
prevented the first attempt to extract the paratroopers. The second attempt demonstrated the capability of the Il-76MD military transport aircraft. The aircraft not only
supported the landing of the assault force and a cargo drop but also conducted a landing at the new Franz Josef Land Archipelago’s military airfield.

Source: Thomas Nilsen, “Paratrooper jump at 10,000 meters over Russian Arctic base,” The Barents Sea Independent Observer, 26 April
2020. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2020/04/paratroopers-jump-10000-meters-over-russian-arctic-base
Paratrooper jump at 10,000 meters over Russian Arctic base
The jump took place over Aleksandra Land, the westernmost island on the archipelago of Franz Josef Land. Here, at 80 degrees north, Russia’s Arctic forces have
built its northernmost military complex with a new 2,500-meter-long runway and a huge building infrastructure.
The Nagurskoye base is equipped with the latest gear for Arctic military warfare. That includes snowmobiles, personnel carriers, helicopters, radar, and anti-aircraft
missile systems like the S-300 aimed at strengthening control over Arctic air space….
With the new runway, bombers like the MiG-31K can use the airport. So can large transport planes. The airport is built about three kilometers west of the runway
Russia abandoned after the end of the Cold War.
After landing in the snow, the paratroopers began the main stage of the tactical and special exercise. Several dozen of them conducted reconnaissance and search
operations aimed at destroying the conditional enemy sabotage and reconnaissance group... The soldiers also used a UAV in their search for the enemy.
The exercise continued for three days along the northern shores of Aleksandra Land, around Cape Nimrod, close to the eastern edge of the largest glacier on the
island. In the end, the soldiers advanced to their collection point and went back to the Nagurskoye base.
Lt. Gen. Yunus-Bek Yevkurov promises more training like this. “We will conduct similar exercises annually, in different regions of the Arctic, with different
compositions of the participants involved and at different phases of training.” Before being appointed Deputy Minister of Defense last summer, Yevkurov headed the
Republic of Ingushetia for more than ten years. At Franz Josef Land, Yevkurov observed the exercise together with another Deputy Defense Minister, Colonel-General
Andrei Serdyukov, Commander of the Airborne Forces. He headed up the Russian effort in Syria last summer.

OE Watch | June 2020

13

EURASIA
Russia’s Baltic Fleet Forces Conduct Extensive Exercise in
Kaliningrad
OE Watch Commentary: NATO’s ‘Cold Response’ military exercise in Norway was cancelled midway due to the COVID-19 outbreak
(see: “Russia’s Hot Response to NATO’s ‘Cold Response’ Exercise,” OE Watch, April 2020). Defender 2020, NATO’s military exercise facing
Kaliningrad, was also cancelled/postponed for the same reason. Russia, however, conducted her counter exercise in Kaliningrad and pulled out all
the stops, as discussed in the accompanying passage from Izvestia. Like all countries, Russia is suffering from the coronavirus outbreak and even
cancelled the huge 9 May Victory Day parade in Moscow because of the virus. Their rationale may be that wars are fought alongside epidemics,
so major training for war should also continue despite disease outbreaks. The American War for Independence was fought during the course of
a major smallpox epidemic that nearly cost Washington his army (see: Pox Americana: The Great American Smallpox Epidemic of 1775-82 by
Elizabeth Fenn). End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Large-scale exercises of the Baltic Fleet forces in

Kaliningrad Oblast occurred in the last 10 days of April…. A
Military Department spokesman told Izvestia that the Baltic
Fleet maneuvers were based on the combat training plan and
that all missions were accomplished.”
Source: Dmitriy Boltenkov and Roman Kretsul, “The Baltic Fortress: the maneuvers in Kaliningrad Oblast demonstrate how the Armed
Forces repel aggression,” Izvestia, 3 May 2020. https://iz.ru/1006630/dmitrii-boltenkov-roman-kretcul/baltiiskaia-krepost-chto-pokazalimanevry-v-kaliningradskoi-oblasti
The Baltic Fortress: the maneuvers in Kaliningrad Oblast demonstrate how the Armed Forces repel aggression
Large-scale exercises of the Baltic Fleet forces in Kaliningrad Oblast occurred in the last 10 days of April…. A Military Department spokesman told Izvestia that the
Baltic Fleet maneuvers were based on the combat training plan and that all missions were accomplished.
In the Sky
The Baltic Exclave is the country’s most vulnerable region since it has no land ties either with Russia or with allied Belarus. Contemporary military conflicts show that
much is decided in the initial period of combat - the first two to three days. This combat also determines the further course of operations.
The primary mission of the Baltic Fleet is to prevent the enemy from conducting massive missile-aircraft strikes against its facilities and the infrastructure of
Kaliningrad Oblast. It also needs to lay minefields to counter an enemy amphibious landing and to conduct a land defense. All of these actions were rehearsed during
the course of the exercises that were conducted during the last 10 days of April.
The A-50U Early Radar Warning Aircraft “Sergey Atayants” flew in to command and control the air forces and air defense forces in Kaliningrad Oblast. Those unique
aircraft are rare guests in the sky over the Baltic.
Under the command and control of the A-50U, Su-30SM and Su-24M strike aircraft conducted a series of sorties, during the course of which they refined the conduct
of strikes against airborne and coastal targets. Combat helicopters, among which were Ka-29s, which recently arrived in the Fleet, also accomplished a broad range of
combat missions. And two Tu-160 strategic missile aircraft became involved in the maneuvers over the Baltic Sea on 29 April. In general, this major exercise was the
first for the recently created Kaliningrad 132nd Composite Aviation Division.
The large-scale aerial maneuvers attracted the attention of the NATO countries. In particular. Belgian fighter aircraft “intercepted” the A-50U. They escorted the
Tu-160s and some other of our aircraft on various sectors of the routes. The Russian pilots gave as good as they got - Su-27s “intercepted” a Swedish reconnaissance
aircraft and also unduly aggressive Belgian F-16s.
On the whole, Kaliningrad Oblast is adequately protected with air defense systems, beginning with S-400 long-range complexes and ending with on-board ship
systems. Due to the proximity of Baltiysk Naval Base to the NATO countries’ borders, the PVO crews will not have time to build up in the event of the initiation of combat
operations. This is precisely why the ship air defense systems have been included in the region’s defense loop.
At Sea
In the last several years, the Baltic Fleet has received four new small missile ships (MRKs), which are armed with “Kalibr” missile systems. The MRKs “Mytishchi”,
“Sovetsk”, “Liven”, and “Passat” have become part of the fleet. They conducted artillery firing and missile launches together with the Missile Boats “Morshansk”
and R-257. Unfortunately, the Baltic Sea’s maritime commerce conditions do not permit the conduct of full-fledged missile firings. Consequently, the launches were
electronic.
The Baltic Fleet Corvettes “Soobrazitelnyy”, “Steregushchiy”, and “Stoykiy” also rehearsed missile and artillery firings at airborne, naval surface, and coastal
targets.
The Large Landing Ships (BDK) “Korolev” and “Kaliningrad”, the Small Hovercraft Landing Ship “Yevgeniy Kocheshkov”, and small landing craft conducted
an amphibious landing of naval infantrymen on the coast during … the exercises. The BDKs also laid naval mines. This obstacle would help defend the coast of
Kaliningrad Oblast from an enemy amphibious assault force and from the operations of the North Atlantic Alliance countries’ submarines.
Antisubmarine warfare ships conducted a search and rehearsed the “destruction” of submarines…. Minesweepers, including the latest Project 12700 Ship “Aleksandr
Obukhov”, were involved with the mine-clearing of the water area. All Baltic Fleet ships essentially put to sea during the exercises.
On Land
The Baltic Fleet ground force was recently reinforced with new equipment - “Msta” and “Pion” artillery systems and “Smerch” multiple rocket launcher systems. A
tank regiment has also joined the 11th Army Corps. In the future, one of the motorized rifle brigades will upgrade into a full-fledged division. All of the new ground
force equipment, was involved for the first time during these exercises.
The Baltic Fleet forces conducted these major exercises, despite the coronavirus pandemic that is raging in the world and in Russia. The exercises were a serious
inspection of the entire oblast’s defense system. Judging by the careful attention NATO paid to them, maneuvers were successful.

OE Watch | June 2020

14

EURASIA
Northern Fleet Expands Intelligence Support Vessels
OE Watch Commentary: According to the Barents Sea Independent Observer and Svobodnaya Pressa, the Northern Fleet has yet another ice
class scientific research ship to explore, map the Artic seabed and conduct intelligence information. The ship was named after Physicist Anatoli
Aleksandrov, who became famous after devising a method for demagnetizing Soviet ships during World War II. He also worked on the design
of the Soviet atomic bomb and later on the RBMK nuclear reactor that exploded in Chernobyl in 1986. The vessel was built as part of the Main
Directorate for Deep Sea Research [GUGI], which conducts underwater research and intelligence gathering. GUGI has six nuclear-powered
mini-submarines and a host of support vessels. (Also see: “For Those in Peril Under the Sea,” OE Watch, August 2019 and “Cruising in a StretchSubmarine,” OE Watch, June 2019.) End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“More than a year after schedule, the Zvezdochka yard in

Severodvinsk, northern Russia, has officially handed over the
“Akademik Aleksandrov” to the Northern Fleet. The ship is the
3rd in the Navy’s new series of special-purpose ships made for
transportation of big-dimension military and special equipment,
as well as search and rescue operations.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “Navy gets new vessel for secret underwater operations in Arctic,” The Barents Sea Independent Observer, 14 April
2020. https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/2020/04/navy-gets-new-vessel-secret-russian-underwater-operations-arctic
Navy gets new vessel for secret underwater operations in Arctic
More than a year after schedule, the Zvezdochka yard in Severodvinsk, northern Russia, has officially handed over the “Akademik Aleksandrov” to the Northern Fleet.
The ship is the 3rd in the Navy’s new series of special-purpose ships made for transportation of big-dimension military and special equipment, as well as search and
rescue operations. It was put on the water in Severodvinsk in May 2017 and has since undergone final construction works and testing. Its sister ship “Zvezdochka” is
already serving in the Northern Fleet, while the Pacific Fleet operates the “Akademik Kovalyov”. A fourth ship of the kind is currently under construction at the yard in
Severodvinsk.
The “Akademik Aleksandrov” will be involved in some of the most top secret operations of the Russian Navy…. [The] vessel was built on order from the Main
Directorate for Deep Sea Research [GUGI], the top secret unit directly subordinated the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces. Russia has expanded its fleet of
special purpose vessels recently. Several of them are built for seabed operations possibly including sabotage operations against underwater cables. The “Akademik
Aleksandrov” and its sister vessels are believed of carrying small-scale submarines for special operations and testing new weapons, including the Poseidon underwater
nuclear drone.

Source: Vladimir Tuchkov, “Secret Intelligence Collector Akademik Alexandrov will approach Trump in the area of Alaska: the Defense
Ministry’s Main Directorate for Deep Water Research is Solving two Global Missions,” Svobodnaya Pressa, 14 April 2020. https://svpressa.
ru/war21/article/262548/
Secret Intelligence Collector Akademik Alexandrov will approach Trump in the area of Alaska
Akademik Alexandrov is a secret ship. And, although several of its technical specifications are not secret, one can only guess as to the composition, purpose and
capabilities of the special equipment….The ship has a displacement of 5,800 tons. A length of 96 m, a beam of 18 meters, and a draft of 9.3 meters. It develops a speed
of 14 knots. The crew is 65 men. It is equipped with two electric motors with a power of 3,262 hp each. It has a helicopter pad to take helicopters on board, but does
not possess its own helicopter….There are three electro-hydraulic cranes… The S2500 – possesses a record cargo capacity among domestic ship-based cranes, lifting
100 tons to a boom reach of up to 25 meters. The S120 has a telescoping boom, the maximum extension of which is 20 meters. This crane is equipped with a device to
compensate for dynamic loads and a pitch compensation system, and positions cargo underwater to a depth of 500 meters. The S15 is a crane manipulator with a cargo
capacity of up to 2 tons….
The ship is intended to carry out scientific and research operations on the Arctic shelf and Antarctic seas, supporting the operation of special equipment, monitoring
areas of fleet activity, areas of the conduct of tests, position location of potentially dangerous bottom objects, the installation of bottom monitoring/measurement and
other equipment. It can also support search and rescue operations, towing, the installation of military and special equipment, and the tracking and lifting of sunken
naval equipment.
However the main mission for which the Akademik Alexandrov was built…are intelligence collection and sabotage operations…It is equipped for deep-water
submersion of diving teams. It must have television guidance equipment, which can operate at depths down to 6,000 meters... Deepwater intelligence collection is
carried out against underwater cable lines of the US and the NATO countries, over which secret information is transmitted and circulates in naval networks of the North
Atlantic alliance. It is read with the aid of special devices, attached to the cable, and transmitted to the carrier-ship of the intelligence collection equipment. By this
method it is also possible to introduce jamming into the cable line with the goal of temporarily disrupting the operation of information trunk lines….
Oceanographic research ships can gather important data extremely effectively, placing hydrophones, which capture acoustic waves, disseminated in the water
environment on the bottom, near NATO bases. In this way it can track the situation in a … broad region, identify the movement of submarines, capture the acoustic
signatures of new submarines and surface ships, recognize the specifics of operation of this or that equipment of submarine and surface ship bases.
The ships could also collect surface – broadcast – radio-technical intelligence. And in this sense, working directly in two environments, is more effective than
intelligence collection aircraft….
The ship could work in the construction of a network of autonomous robotic bottom base stations (ADS), which will spread hydro-acoustic antennas, able to operate
both in a passive as well as in an active mode on the bottom. The ADS would process sonar data received and retransmit it to a command post via a satellite channel.
The ADS network is able to monitor the surface and underwater situation over an area of hundreds of cubic kilometers.
The ship could also receive relief maps of the sea bottom in sectors explored by the Poseidon underwater nuclear unmanned vehicle. Without such maps the covertness
of a strategic unmanned vehicle will be low, since it will have to use active acoustic location for orientation.

OE Watch | June 2020

15

EURASIA
Russian Electronic Warfare Leverages Artificial
Intelligence
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Izvestia discusses the capabilities of Russia’s first brigade-level EW C2
system, the RB-109A ‘Bylina’ Automated EW system. The RB-109A
reportedly has an artificial intelligence capability, which automates
C2 duties. Presumably, this artificial intelligence is a more advanced
technology, as the term ‘automated’ [автоматизированный] is often
used to describe Russian systems, but the RB-109A is specifically
mentioned to have ‘artificial intelligence’ [искусственный интеллект].
The excerpted article from Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer discusses
how the Russian Moskva-1 electronic warfare system also leverages
artificial intelligence. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

EW The 1L265 Intelligence Vehicle of the 1L267 Moskva-1 System.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin via Vitalykuzmin.net, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Static-p4/ikG92wV3/A, CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

“The new complexes [Bylina] will increase the effectiveness of the employment of
EW systems by 40 to 50 percent…”
-Viktor Murakhovski, Editor-in-Chief of “Arsenal of the Fatherland” Magazine
“A high-level of artificial intelligence is one of the important characteristics
of the Moskva-1. For example, during a massive enemy air attack, the system
automatically determines the most important targets…”
Source: Aleksey Ramm, Anton Lavrov, and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Видит цель: «Былина» сможет атаковать противника без участия
оператора (See the Target: The ‘Bylina’ Will be Able to Attack the Enemy Without an Operator),” Izvestia Online, 16 April 2020. https://
iz.ru/1000101/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/vidit-tcel-bylina-smozhet-atakovat-protivnika-bez-uchastiia-operatora
The Armed Forces are preparing for massive deliveries of “Bylina” electronic warfare (EW) complexes, which artificial intelligence will control. Units and formations will receive the
unique system by 2025. Bylina can analyze the situation and find and classify targets in real time without the operators’ participation. After this, it will determine which systems will
better suppress or destroy enemy communications equipment or other equipment. Experts note that the employment of those complexes will significantly increase the effectiveness of the
EW systems on the battlefield…The new equipment is capable of tracking the probable enemy’s ships and submarines.The new complexes will increase the effectiveness of the employment
of EW systems by 40 percent to 50 percent, “Arsenal of the Fatherland” Magazine editor in chief Viktor Murakhovskiy reported to Izvestiya. “The battlefield’s contemporary information
space is saturated with electronic systems — both ours and the enemy’s,” he pointed out. “We are talking about unmanned aerial vehicles, communications systems, and radars. In that
situation, it is important to suppress enemy electronics and, in so doing, not interfere with our own.”
It is very difficult to accurately take into account all of the nuances of the process in the manual mode. The Bylina will help precisely with this. The system uses elements of artificial
intelligence. Based upon the available information, it decides which EW systems, based upon which scheme, on which frequencies, and with what output it needs to operate against some
or other targets. If necessary, the Bylina makes changes to the operation of individual components in real time, the expert pointed out. The elements of artificial intelligence permit
it to take into account a multitude of variable factors. As a result, the machine will instantaneously make a decision there, where a man will require time to ponder and for additional
calculations…
The RB-109A Bylina Automated EW equipment control system’s equipment is mounted on five all-terrain trucks. Electronic equipment, communications gear, and also life support
equipment will be installed in closed truck beds. That configuration provides full independence and adequately comfortable working conditions for the combat crews in field conditions.
Having arrived at the deployment location, the soldiers and officers can immediately begin to accomplish the combat mission.

Source: “радиусе полутысячи километров все под контролем «Москвы» (‘Moskva’ Keeps Everything Under Control Within a Range of
500 km),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer Online, 30 March 2020. https://www.vpk-news.ru/news/56157
The Russian Moskva-1 electronic warfare system, which has been supplied to the army since 2015 and has advanced capabilities for controlling the electronic weapons of a potential
enemy, has no match in the militaries of other countries…The electronic edition of the Army Standard made this information public. According to the publication, Moskva-1 has a range
of up to 400 kilometers with a 360-degree view. The complex has two modules: the 1L265E electronic intelligence module and the 1L266E automated control post for jamming stations.
Among other things, the system is designed for the detection of the enemy’s military equipment and cruise missiles by monitoring airspace. Moskva-1 identifies targets, sets the course,
measures parameters and trails air radiation sources operating in the radio frequency range.
Moskva-1 transmits data on detected enemy targets to either air defense and aviation units for destruction, or to other electronic warfare systems for suppression. Often, the Moskva-1
system works in conjunction with the Krasukha S-4 electronic warfare system. Moskva-1 can simultaneously set tasks for nine electronic warfare and air defense systems. At the same
time, Moskva-1 remains invisible to the enemy’s radio surveillance, since it operates in passive radar mode and transmits all information through secure communication channels.
A high-level of artificial intelligence is one of the important characteristics of the Moskva-1. For example, during a massive enemy air attack, the system automatically determines the
most important targets…

OE Watch | June 2020

16

EURASIA
The Changing Character of War and the Growing Role of
Electronic Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted interview of Lieutenant General Yuriy Lastochkin, Chief of the Russian Federation’s
Electronic Warfare Troops, discusses his views on the role and future of electronic warfare. In particular, General Lastochkin discusses the changing
character of war, and how Russian electronic warfare capabilities are expanding into “the information and telecommunications environment.” The
excerpted article from Izvestia discusses how the Murmansk-BN electronic warfare system can be used to disrupt telecommunications as well as
more conventional military purposes. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

1RL257E Krasukha-4 EW System.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin via Vitalykuzmin.net, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2019-Static-part-3/i-BXBvGVL/A, CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

“The traditional frontal collisions of large troop groupings at
the strategic and operational level are gradually becoming a
thing of the past; remote contactless effect through the entire
depth of the enemy battle order becomes the main method of
achieving the operational (battle) objective.”

OE Watch | June 2020

17

EURASIA
Continued: The Changing Character of War and the
Growing Role of Electronic Warfare
Source: Victor Hudoleyev, “Стражники эфира на правильном пути (Guards of Airwaves on Right Path), Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 15 April
2020. http://redstar.ru/strazhniki-efira-na-pravilnom-puti/?attempt=1
Yuriy Illarionovich, what is the role of electronic warfare in modern military conflicts?
The modern military operations are defined by a widespread use of an entire spectrum of combat information and control systems, functioning in a single
information and telecommunications environment; countering those determines the leading role of electronic warfare in modern armed conflicts. I will
stress that the emergence of a new field of confrontation -- the information and telecommunications environment -- significantly expands the spectrum
of the REB forces and assets’ tasks, and places their employment methods within the ranks of important measures for the comprehensive support of the
troops (force) groupings’ operations in modern conditions. At the same time, the role of electronic warfare at the modern stage is determined by its
potential capabilities in electronic suppression of information transmitting channels, in the insertion of “intelligent” jamming into enemy troops and
weapons command and control automated systems; electronic protection of own technical equipment information, data transmission and processing from
destruction, distortion, reconnaissance, and information leaks through technical channels; comprehensive technical monitoring of the countermeasures
effectiveness against enemy technical assets, and the electronic protection of own troops (forces).
In addition, conducting electronic warfare makes it possible to exclude (disrupt) the high-precision navigation of precision-guided weapons’ carriers,
and thereby to reduce the likelihood of suffering damages to critically important industrial and defense infrastructure facilities of the Russian
Federation. The experience of combating enemy troops and weapons control systems in regional conflicts of the last decade attests to the fact that the
modern information technologies, used in the leading countries’ armed forces control systems, make it possible to significantly reduce spatial, time, and
information gaps between troop formations and command and control entities. The traditional frontal collisions of large troop groupings at the strategic
and operational level are gradually becoming a thing of the past; remote contactless effect through the entire depth of the enemy battle order becomes the
main method of achieving the operational (battle) objective…
From your standpoint, which directions of the Electronic Warfare Troops development are especially relevant right now?
The analysis of the conflicts of recent years has shown that the main features influencing the development of the electronic warfare troops include: the
use of various electronic systems of not only military, but also of civilian (dual) designation, including mass media, satellite, cellular, trunk networks,
various social networks, official and amateur radio stations; indoctrination of the population in the conflict zone; the widespread use of unmanned aerial
vehicles for reconnaissance, delivering strikes, and conducting electronic warfare; the large-scale use of global navigation satellite systems; the maximal
use of technical equipment of all frequency ranges for conducting electronic reconnaissance. These circumstances predetermine the main directions of the
REB troops development. These include: the creation of robotized electronic jamming systems; the increase of the capacity of electronic warfare assets
and systems; the disruption of communications and data transmission systems of various designations; combating robotic armament systems, military
equipment and precision-guided weapons, including those used by enemy unmanned aerial vehicles; the obstruction (stalling) of nautical-time support;
active counteraction against radio and radio-technical reconnaissance assets…
What are the innovative approaches in developing the REB troops weapons systems?
The balanced development of the electronic warfare weapon system envisages the improvement of REB equipment both with the use of traditional
approaches and with the introduction of innovative solutions. The traditional approach to the development of the REB equipment envisages its
improvement in the areas of expansion of target range, reducing the number of REB assets types, their unification, the increase of protection against
precision weapons, their mobility and upgrade potential…

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy, “Без шума в эфире: войска готовы глушить вражеские радио- и телетрансляции (Without
Noise on the Air Waves: The Troops Are Prepared to Jam Enemy Radio and Television Transmissions), Izvestia Online, 28 April 2020. https://
iz.ru/985812/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/bez-shuma-v-efire-voiska-gotovy-glushit-vrazheskie-radio-i-teletransliatcii
The troops have learned to combat the terrorists’ television and radio stations. As the experience of the wars in Chechnya and Syria have shown, the
guerrillas used them to agitate the population and to recruit new followers. State-of-the-art technologies permit the extremists to rapidly establish that
broadcast. Russian army units are prepared to utilize the latest “Murmansk-BN” electronic warfare complexes to counter the propaganda threat. The
experts point out that this equipment will permit them to effectively defend the information space…the “Murmansk” vehicles didn’t have to conduct a
lengthy and exhausting forced march to the enemy’s deployment location - the EW systems operated at a range of over 2,000 kilometers from the targets…
As a rule, the EW complexes plan of action is rather simple: They use a more power signal to “choke” the transmission channels, TelecomDaily
Information-Analytical Agency General Director Denis Kuskov explained. “At the contemporary level of development of the equipment, television
and radio broadcast channels - are one of the simplest and most effective methods to impact the population” - the Analyst reported to Izvestiya. “The
television and internet infrastructure in a combat operations area will be damaged or disconnected as the first priority. The production and delivery of
print products will require time and major labor costs. It is easiest of all to organize information and propaganda using small mobile television and radio
stations”.
Moreover, one can supply the population only that information flow, which the distributors need, via small mobile television and radio stations, the
expert pointed out. They will be able to appreciably influence the population and the people’s mood in this manner. In the expert’s opinion, you don’t need
a lot of resources and time to prepare this content - one man in front of a camera or microphone is sufficient.
…The “Murmansk-BN” was declassified quite recently. Right now, we already know that this - is an automated radio jamming complex for
communications lines in the short-wave band. Based upon its output parameters, it surpasses all existing equivalent systems in the world by several
times. It is sufficient to point out that the complex’s radio communications jamming range totals approximately 5,000 kilometers and in ideal conditions
the signal’s transmission can be increased up to 8,000 kilometers. In the travel configuration, the “Murmansk” equipment is accommodated in several
“KamAZ” large-capacity, multi-axle motor vehicles. Powerful telescoping antenna masts and also low-frequency antenna wires are included in the set. If
necessary, the masts are extended to a height of up to 32 meters using hydraulic equipment.
Those vehicles were transferred to the Baltic Fleet last year. The complex, which has been placed on alert in Kaliningrad, is also capable of depriving
enemy combat ships, aircraft, drones, and troop headquarters of communications.
With the acceptance of the “Murmansk-BN” into the inventory, the army has received at its disposal EW equipment, which operates not only in the
operational-tactical but also in the operational-strategic depth. Furthermore, this complex is capable of conducting communications intelligence. As a
rule, the NATO countries use the short-wave radio band, in which it operates, for communications at great distances between aircraft and surface ships.

OE Watch | June 2020

18

EURASIA
‘Penitsillin’ Artillery Reconnaissance System Enters
Service
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestia discusses Russia’s most recent attempt to diversify artillery
reconnaissance capabilities, the ‘Penitsillin’ automated sonic-thermal system artillery reconnaissance system. The Penitsillin is mounted on
a Kamaz-6350 chassis, with a detection radius of up to 25 km. It consists of the 1B75 electro-optical module, which works in the infrared and
visible spectrum using imaging cameras placed on a telescopic boom, and several ground-installed 1B76 sound and seismic receivers. The system
receives and processes thermal, acoustic and seismic signals from enemy fire, calculating their location and transmitting the data to friendly
artillery reportedly in less than five seconds. Russian experts point out that the latest equipment will fundamentally increase the effectiveness of
Russian artillery. According to Izvestia, training has already begun on the system, as the system will eventually be fielded throughout the Artillery
Troops and the Coastal Defense Artillery Troops. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The shot from a gun creates a sound wave in the surface layer of the
atmosphere, which covers very great distances... These sensors and special
algorithms, which take into account the current state of the atmosphere
(humidity, wind, and other parameters), permit the electronics to calculate the
deployment location of the enemy weapon positions with the highest accuracy.”
-Viktor Murakhovskiy, Editor-in-Chief of “Arsenal of the Fatherland”
MagazineCenter for Space Situation Reconnaissance

Source: Bogdan Stepovoy and Anton Lavrov, “«Пенициллин» идёт в разведку: артиллерию наведут на цель электронные комплексы
(‘Penitsillin’ Is Going on Reconnaissance: Electronic Complexes Guide the Artillery to the Target),” Izvestia Online, 6 May 2020. https://
iz.ru/1007743/bogdan-stepovoi-anton-lavrov/penitcillin-idet-v-razvedku-artilleriiu-navedut-na-tcel-elektronnye-kompleksy
‘Penitsillin’ Is Going on Reconnaissance: Electronic Complexes Guide the Artillery to the Target
…Sources in the Military Department told Izvestiya that the fundamental decision on the initiation of the deliveries of the AZK 1B76
“Penitsillin” reconnaissance complexes has already been made. They plan that the equipment will initially begin to arrive in the Ground
Troops artillery regiments and brigades and later the equipment will augment the arsenal of the Russian Navy’s Coastal Missile-Artillery
troops…There is only one “Penitsillin” complex in the Armed Forces for the time being. It arrived at the Missile Troops and Artillery Combat
Employment Center in Saratov this year. The officers-instructors, who will teach the crews to work with the new equipment beginning next
year, have already been trained. After passing the examinations and all of the needed standards, the crews will obtain the new equipment and
will be sent to the troops…
A set includes a special optical-electronic module - six each ordinary and thermal-imaging cameras, which operate in the infrared range.
They have been installed on a vertical lifting mast and are capable of supporting high-speed data sorting. The video systems can conduct
surveillance of an extensive sector and detect the flashes of shots or the explosions of projectiles, which will permit the electronics to
determine the munition’s flight trajectory and the location of the camouflaged artillery positions. The complex also has several special remote
sensors. They permit the calculation of the shooter’s coordinates while using the acoustic location principle, Viktor Murakhovskiy pointed out.
“The shot from a gun creates a sound wave in the surface layer of the atmosphere, which covers very great distances”, he explained. “These
sensors and special algorithms, which take into account the current state of the atmosphere (humidity, wind, and other parameters), permit
the electronics to calculate the deployment location of the enemy weapon positions with the highest accuracy.”
The preparation of the “Penitsillin” for combat takes a matter of minutes - the crew needs to competently deploy and camouflage the
equipment. Then its role is reduced to the minimum - the electronics engage. The modules must supplement each other in an engagement.
Based upon the characteristics of the sound wave, the flashes, and also based upon the strength and nature of the detonations, the complex
determines which artillery, rocket-propelled, or missile systems launched the munitions. The time of receipt of the coordinates of a single
target, which is conducting firing, totals no more than five seconds. During this short interval, the target’s location is plotted on an electronic

OE Watch | June 2020

19

EURASIA
Russian-Ukrainian Antagonism Spreads to History
OE Watch Commentary: World War II memorials have served to
deepen the antagonism between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
A recent commemorative ceremony in Berlin became the subject of an
open conflict as reflected in the accompanying excerpts from the proKremlin Izvestia.
The first excerpt describes the reaction of the Ukrainian Ambassador
to Germany, Andrei Mel’nik, to an invitation from Berlin, to participate
in a ceremony dedicated to Soviet soldiers fallen in WW II. The
invitation for the ceremony to be held at the site of the Wehrmacht
surrender on 2 May 1945, was also extended to representatives of
Russia and Belarus. The Ambassador refused to attend, stating that
it was his moral obligation to honor the memory of war victims, but
could not imagine doing so with Russian representatives “even in his
worst dream.” He stated that the Ukrainian contribution to the war was
being minimized and that Russia was seeking to claim sole credit for
the victory. The article also points out that Mel’nik “blamed Moscow
for the troubles of Ukraine and for the situation in the south east of the
country.”
Wreath of honor to celebrate at the Soviet War Memorial in Berlin-Treptow.
Source: By Bernd.Brincken - Own work via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=11222509, CC

BY-SA 3.0
The next day, Izvestia covered the response of Russian Senator Aleksei
Pushkov to the Ukrainian Ambassador’s refusal to participate in the wreath-laying ceremony. As the second excerpt points out, Pushkov posted on
Twitter that the Ukrainian refusal was “just the next demonstration of contempt from the side of the Kievan elite.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Byrne)

“He said that to honor the memory of the victims of the war is his
moral obligation, yet “even in his worst dream” he could not imagine
laying wreaths with the Russian representative…”
Source: “Посол Украины в Берлине отказался возлагать цветы с послом России (Ukrainian Ambassador Refused to Lay Flowers with the
Ambassador of Russia,” Izvestia, 2 May 2020. https://iz.ru/1006979/2020-05-02/posol-ukrainy-v-berline-otkazalsia-vozlagat-tcvety-s-poslomrossii
Ambassador of Ukraine to Germany Andrei Mel’nik refused to take part in a flower-laying ceremony to fallen Soviet soldiers due to the
presence of Russian Ambassador Sergei Nachaev, writes the newspaper Tagesspiegel.
According to the edition, the Ukrainian diplomat received an invitation from Berlin along with the Russian and Belarussian diplomatic
missions to a dedication to the 75th anniversary of the Victory over fascism and the capitulation of the Wehrmacht.
Only Mel’nik refused. According to him, the role of Ukrainian in the battle with the Nazis is underestimated as if the Soviet Red Army could
be considered Russian. He said that to honor the memory of the victims of the war is his moral obligation, yet “even in his worst dream” he
could not imagine laying wreaths with the Russian representative. He again blamed Moscow for the troubles of Ukraine and for the situation
in the south-east of the country.
Source: “Пушков оценил отказ посла Украины от участия в церемонии в Берлине (Pushkov Evaluates the Refusal of the Ukrainian
Ambassador to Participate in Ceremony in Berlin),” Izvestia, 3 May 2020. https://iz.ru/1007240/2020-05-03/pushkov-otcenil-otkaz-poslaukrainy-ot-uchastiia-v-tceremonii-v-berline
Pushkov Evaluated the Refusal of the Ukrainian Ambassador to Participate in Berlin Ceremony
Russian Senator Aleksei Pushkov called the refusal of the Ukrainian ambassador Andrei Mel’kina to lay a wreath together with the Russian
ambassador in honor of the 75th anniversary of the capitulation of the Wehrmacht a demonstration of hatred.
According to Pushkov, nothing else was to be expected from the Ukrainian government. “I don’t think that the refusal of the ambassador of
Ukraine to lay a wreath together with the ambassador of Russia, which is widely reported- is newsworthy. Who expected otherwise? It is just
the next demonstration of contempt from the side of the Kievan elite. The place for this information is “petty facts”. Nothing more”, -wrote
the senator of Twitter on May 2nd.
OE Watch | June 2020

20

EURASIA
Conscription in the Caucasus during Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: The governments of the
Caucasus have been dealing with a number of issues
related to the coronavirus pandemic, including safely
carrying out conscription for their respective armed
forces. The accompanying excerpted articles offer a look
at how this is taking place.
The article from Trend, a news agency in Azerbaijan,
reports that “the draft for military service and the return
home of service members in Azerbaijan will be carried
out by a special method.” The official interviewed does
not offer any more details about this, but claims that “if
the rules of the coronavirus were not followed during
military service, it would be extremely difficult to protect
the military,” suggesting that the armed forces have been
following some set of measures to curb the spread of the
virus to continue operating.
The first article from Kavkazskiy Uzel, a news website
focusing on the Caucasus region, reports on the upcoming
draft in Armenia and how “members of the armed forces
and recruits will be provided medical masks, gloves
and disinfectants, and the parents of the conscripts will
be able to follow the process through a video feed.” As
Georgian Soldiers during an exercise.
of the article’s publication date, Armenia is reportedly
Source: Eric Bloom, US Army via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Georgian_Soldiers_during_an_exercise.jpg, Public
Domain
the “leader in the number of infected.” The article also
mentions other measures that will be taken during the draft and that it “will be held [from] July 1 to August 30.”
The second article from Kavkazskiy Uzel reports on how the Georgian government has been dealing with the pandemic and its draft. As of early
March, the Georgian government “postponed the spring draft for a month” until “April 13.” While there has been no update on the status of the
draft since the article came out, the government extended its state of emergency until late May.
Overall, the governments of Azerbaijan and Armenia are moving forward with their annual drafts, though they are taking precautions during
the ongoing pandemic. While there is no updated information on when and how the Georgian government will carry out its draft, it is worth
considering how conscription in Georgia has changed over the past few years. The Georgian government abolished the draft for the armed forces
in 2016, as it tried to bring in more contract soldiers, only to reinstate it a year later. If this is any indication, the draft in Georgia is likely to happen
to at some point and in some form. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“During the summer draft, members of the armed forces
and recruits will be provided medical masks, gloves
and disinfectants, and the parents of the conscripts will
be able to follow the process through a video feed, the
Ministry of Defense of Armenia reported.”

OE Watch | June 2020

21

EURASIA
Continued: Conscription in the Caucasus during
Coronavirus
Source: Ilham Isabalayev, “Призыв на военную службу в Азербайджане будет осуществляться в особом порядке (The draft for military
service in Azerbaijan will be carried out by a special method),” Trend, 1 May 2020. https://www.trend.az/azerbaijan/society/3232972.html
The draft for military service and the return home of service members in Azerbaijan will be carried out by a special method...Ramin
Bayramli, head of the association for the management of medical territorial units, said this at a briefing today.
According to him, if the rules of the coronavirus were not followed during military service, it would be extremely difficult to protect the
military…

Source: “Минобороны Армении определило меры безопасности на время призывной компании (The Ministry of Defense of Armenia
has determined the security measures for the draft),” Kavkazskiy Uzel, 29 April 2020. https://www.kavkaz-uzel.eu/articles/348969/
During the summer draft, members of the armed forces and recruits will be provided medical masks, gloves and disinfectants, and the
parents of the conscripts will be able to follow the process through a video feed, the Ministry of Defense of Armenia reported…Armenia,
which has a smaller population than Georgia and Azerbaijan, remains the (regional) leader in the number of infected…
Conscripts at the processing point will be transported in small groups, for which the number of vehicles will be increased, said Shushan
Stepanyan, a spokesman for the defense ministry…Recruits with a fever will be isolated in military units for 14 days and they will be under the
care of medical staff and tested for COVID-19…The draft will be held July 1 to August 30 and preparatory work will start on May 1…

Over the years, FMSO has studied and written about foreign perspectives on pandemics. One example is below. For more
information on previous FMSO work on pandemics including Ebola, search OE Watch issues:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Death Unguarded: Unsecured Virulent Pathogens in
African Medical Facilities
By Robert Feldman
While affluent countries can afford secure, state-of-the-art bio labs to house deadly pathogens
for research, many countries do not have the financial and/or technical resources to provide
such facilities. Antiquated equipment, minimal security, and other problems have plagued these
labs in less developed countries, increasing the risk for theft of lethal microbes by terrorists as
well as dangerous accidents. This article discusses these issues and the concerns regarding
the ability of some countries to provide ongoing and adequate security of these facilities.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/195089
OE Watch | June 2020

22

EURASIA
Kazakhstan’s Substitute Draft to Combat Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: Although the government of Kazakhstan has been using fewer conscripts to fill the ranks of its armed forces over
the past several years, the annual draft remains an important part of maintaining readiness. Contract soldiers currently make up an estimated 75
percent of the country’s armed forces, with the rest of the positions filled by conscripts. The accompanying excerpted article reports on how the
Kazakh government is dealing with the draft amid the nationwide state of emergency due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The article, from the Russian-language news website Inform Buro, reports that due to the state of emergency, “the spring draft was suspended,”
along with the discharge of conscripts in the spring. However, the government appears to have found a substitute during its state of emergency.
The article notes that, those fit for military service will be drafted for “special groups to combat the spread of coronavirus,” based on a decree
signed by Kazakh President Qassym-Zhomart Toqaev in early April. The article mentions that this will not be a national draft, but instead that
“the number of soldiers and the terms of service [will be] established by local authorities.”
The Deputy Chief of the General Staff mentions that the conscripts in the special groups “will serve at checkpoints, patrol, disinfect and guard
facilities and participate in flood control” and that “in regions where military units are garrisoned, there may not be a draft.” The article also
reports that those drafted “will receive the same salary as they get now,” that they “will serve close to their place of residence so that they can
spend the night at home” and that the “same benefits for military personnel will be provided for those conscripted into the special groups.” End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

Quarantine in Nur-Sultan. 26 March 2020.

Source: Yakov Fedorov via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2020-03-26_Quarantine_in_Nur-Sultan-1.jpg, CC BY SA 4.0

“The Deputy Chief of the General Staff of Kazakhstan,

Ruslan Shpekbayev, told reporters that the special conscripts
would patrol settlements, engage in sanitation and participate
in the response to possible floods in the spring.”

OE Watch | June 2020

23

EURASIA
Continued: Kazakhstan’s Substitute Draft to Combat
Coronavirus
Source: “Daniyar Aysarov, “Спецсборы военнообязанных во время ЧП. Как будут служить призывники (Special groups of draft eligible
people at the time of the emergency situation. How the conscripted will serve),” Inform Buro, 7 April 2020. https://informburo.kz/stati/
specsbory-voennoobyazannyh-vo-vremya-chp-kak-budut-sluzhit-prizyvniki.html
The special groups of draft eligible people could last from 10 day to 3 months. The dates will be determined by local officials. On April 2,
Kazakh President Qassym-Zhomart Toqaev signed a decree on the drafting of those who are eligible for special groups to combat the spread
of the coronavirus. It is unknown how many will be conscripted, because the number of soldiers and the terms of service are established by
local authorities. It is known that more than 500 volunteered…
Who will be drafted into the special group, how much will they receive and how will they serve…The army has categories of fitness for
service:
“A” – is fit for military service
“B” – is fit for military service with minor restrictions
“V” – is limited for military service
“G” – temporarily unfit for military service
“D” – is not suitable for military service in peacetime, limited in wartime
It has been announced that the special groups will be only those eligible for category A
…The conscripts who have a job will receive the same salary as they get now…The plan is that the conscripts will serve close to their place
of residence so that they can spend the night at home. The same benefits for military personnel will be provided for those conscripted into the
special groups…
Because of the state of emergency in Kazakhstan, the spring draft was suspended. Therefore, a special appeal was required not throughout
Kazakhstan, but in regions where there is help needed. The discharge of conscripts in the spring was also suspended…
The Deputy Chief of the General Staff of Kazakhstan, Ruslan Shpekbayev, told reporters that the special conscripts would patrol settlements,
engage in sanitation and participate in the response to possible floods in the spring. “Those eligible for military service will not be transferred
to other regions. They will serve at checkpoints, patrol, disinfect and guard facilities and participate in flood control” said Shpekbayev…
The Ministry of Defense said that the draft will be staggered, depending on need. In regions where military units are garrisoned, there may
not be a draft. In regions where there are not enough resources of the armed forces to ensure the emergency and quarantine, special drafts
will take place…There are plans to draft 100 in Nur Sultan and 200 in Almaty. The number of people planned to be called up in Shymkent is
unknown…

RUSSIA MILITARY STRATEGY: IMPACTING 21ST CENTURY
REFORM AND GEOPOLITICS by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
Russian military’s main tasks are to maintain the combat readiness of the Armed Forces and to
ensure the Russian Federation’s defensive capability. Russia’s military heritage will assist this process tremendously. Combat readiness includes updated strategic thought, new equipment revelations, and future-war projections. Defensive capability includes not just protecting Russia’s territory, but also the security of the nation’s national interests and conduct of geopolitics. Capturing
the essence of these developments is the goal of this book. In the process a few templates for
understanding Russian military thought and actions are offered for further consideration and use.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download

OE Watch | June 2020

24

EURASIA
COVID-19 in Spain
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying reference, from the Spanish-based media network El País, is an easily useable site with graphed
data and an interactive map on the pandemic worldwide, with emphasis on Spain. Spain is a significant reference country as it is, at least according
to El País, the country with the second greatest number of confirmed cases after the United States. At the time of the article, half of Spain was
entering into a recovery phase, as the spread of the virus had been declining sharply. The country-by-country graphs indicate a wide range of
apparent effects, and while the site does not attempt to explain the divergences, it looks to be due at least partly to varying testing and diagnostic
reporting rubrics. Regardless, Spain was undoubtedly one of the hardest hit. As in other countries, the mortal victim cohorts tend to be older.
Judging from El País, the medical challenge presented by the virus in Spain will have only lasted a couple of months. This data set about the
virus in Spain, however, should be compared to another of this month’s OE Watch articles on Spain, “Is Spain’s Future Now Communist?” as the
political and ideological (and likely therefore, geopolitical) outcome of the country’s coronavirus experience may be far more consequential than
the medical. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“In a month and a half, we have [gone] from a daily growth of
42% to less than 1 %...”
Source: Mariano Zafra, Patricia R. Blanco and Luis Sevillano Pires, “Casos confirmados de coronavirus en España y en el mundo
(Confirmed cases of coronavirus in Spain and in the world),” El País, 11 May 2020. https://elpais.com/sociedad/2020/04/09/
actualidad/1586437657_937910.html
“The spread of the new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, arising in the Chinese city of Wuhan at the end of 2019, continues to slow in pace. Even so,
four million additional people in more than 185 countries of the world have been diagnosed with COVID-19. Of those, more than 1,400,000
now have been cured and 283,000 have lost their lives. Little by little, the countries most affected are beginning to de-escalate the confinement
measures with light openings, always attentive that the number of new confirmed cases continues to decline.
Spain is the second country in the world with the most detected cases, behind the United States. The first positive case on Spanish soil was
confirmed on 31 January, but it was in March that the diagnoses began to increase exponentially…
The stabilization of those cases, which continues in decline, led the administration this past 29 April to present a three-phase plan to leave
the confinement, the step down beginning to be applied to half of Spain on 11 May…
Of the mortal victims in Spain, 95% are over 60 years old…
In a month and a half, we have passed from a daily growth of 42% to less than 1 %...”

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download

OE Watch | June 2020

25

EURASIA
Spain’s Leftist Future and Ibero-American Connections
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying references are about postpandemic planning in Spain and about Enrique Santiago, the Secretary
General of the Communist Party of Spain (PCE). Together, the three articles
provide a glimpse at high-level political intrigue involving Ibero-American
far left political parties. They also warn that the future of Spain, or at least the
current formal government planning for that future, is in the hands of people
closely associated with communist party structures and ideology. The first
reference asserts that Enrique Santiago is being funded by an old Cold War
figure, Joel Max Marambio Rodríguez. Marambio is a Chilean national, said
to have been a bodyguard of Chilean president Salvador Allende in the early
1970s. As the reference notes, Marambio was a close associate of Fidel Castro.
Today, the wealthy businessman is known for supporting far-left movements
financially, and any investment he makes in Enrique Santiago looks to result in
a particularly high return. The current Spanish administration under President
Pedro Sánchez is decidedly leftist, formed by the traditional left Spanish
Socialists Workers’ Party (PSOE) and the more far-left Unidos Podemos, the
latter funded heavily by the late Hugo Chávez. The Sánchez administration
recently empowered a commission to set a course into the post-pandemic. The
PSOE and Unidos Podemos elected Santiago to the board, and he looks to
have great influence. The second and third references marvel at his negotiating
skills, giving him credit for having gained tremendous concessions from
the Colombian government when he was negotiating on behalf of the FARC
during the 2016 peace negotiations in Havana. The third reference stresses
what Santiago’s leadership evidently means in terms of ideology. If Enrique
Santiago has his way, Spain will be moving further toward the left. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

President of Spain, Pedro Sanchez.

Source: European Parliament via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Pedro_S%C3%A1nchez_2019_(portrait_crop).jpg, CC BY 2.0

“The only measures that are going to work will have to confront the neoliberal
model that has been in effect.”
-Enrique Santiago, Secretary General of the Communist Party of Spain

Source: Segundo Sanz, “El nº 2 de la comisión para la reconstrucción ha sido apoderado del ‘Agente 007’ de Fidel Castro (The Number 2
of the commission for reconstruction has been empowered by Fidel Castro’s ‘Agent 007’),” OK Diario and Colombian News, 9 May 2020.
https://okdiario.com/espana/vicepresidente-comunista-comision-del-coronavirus-apodera-agente-007-fidel-castro-5578579
“The leader of the Communist Party of Spain, Enrique Santiago, elected by the PSOE and Podemos as vice-president of the Social and
Economic Reconstruction Commission in response to the coronavirus, is empowered by Chilean millionaire Joel Max Marambio, convicted of
corruption. A businessman who has done huge business deals in Cuba, he formed part of Fidel Castro’s tight circle of confidence, to the point
that Joel Max Marambio was known on the island as the dictator’s ‘agent 007’…”

OE Watch | June 2020

26

EURASIA
Continued: Spain’s Leftist Future and Ibero-American
Connections
Source: Enrique Santiago, de negociador de las FARC a reconstruir España
(Enrique Santiago, from FARC negotiator to reconstruct Spain),” Diario
ABC and Colombian News, 8 May 2020. https://www.abc.es/espana/abcinegociador-farc-reconstruir-espana-202005080222_noticia.html
“Santiago was the representative of the FARC guerrilla in conversations
in Havana that led to the signing of the peace accords with the
Administration of Juan Manuel Santos with that guerrilla group. With
great effectiveness he achieved having drug trafficking carried out by the
FARC not be considered a crime but only a form of financing a political
struggle…”
Source: Editors, “Enrique Santiago o cuando el narcotráfico no es un
crimen sino una forma de financiación de la lucha política (Enrique
Santiago, or when drug trafficking is not a crime but a form of financing
the política lstruggle),” Periodistadigital and Colombian News,
8 May 2020. https://www.periodistadigital.com/politica/partidospoliticos/20200508/enrique-santiago-narcotrafico-crimen-formafinanciacion-lucha-politica-noticia-689404304884/
“[Enrique Santiago]: ‘The only measures that are going to work will
have to confront the neoliberal model that has been in effect.’ It is time
to question abusive consumerism and the model of production…’ Last
September, Santiago participated in a talk organized by the journal
Mongolia, and he spiced up the figures of Lenin, Nicolás Maduro, Santiago
Carrillo [Past General Secretary of the Communist Party of Spain]
and Fidel Castro. For example, he referenced Lenin in this way: ‘He is
absolutely vindicated -- from nothing he constructed an alternative state
from where there had been a feudal country.’

Enrique Santiago.

Source: Fernando Jiménez Briz via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:(Enrique_
Santiago)_(1_de_mayo_de_2018)_IMG_0416_(41134553744)_(cropped).jpg, CC BY 2.0

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | June 2020

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese 6G Technology to Drive the Future Battlefield
OE Watch Commentary: Fifth generation network technology (5G) is still in its infancy, yet China already has its sights set on gaining a
foothold in 6G, which many experts estimate to be a decade away. With cutting edge and disruptive technologies such as artificial intelligence and
quantum information currently in the research and development phase, and a changing battlefield to reflect that advancing technology, Chinese
military analysts and strategists are already looking to harness 6G’s potential in future wars. The first article extract, published in People’s Daily,
the official newspaper of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, envisions how 6G will be used in future wars. It starts by
describing some of the (theoretical) technical advantages of 6G over its predecessors. For example, 6G will have broader, multi-spectral band
access than its predecessors. It will allow better cross-domain connectivity and coverage because it will extend beyond the current mobile
technology, which relies on base stations, which causes blind spots in deserts, oceans, and other remote areas. It will allow a deep integration of
network intelligence by incorporating artificial intelligence.
According to the article, the theoretical advantages of 6G technology translate to a wider range of military applications. For example, 6G is
expected to fully integrate battlefield reconnaissance, intelligence networks, unmanned intelligence, and information processing. Combined with
other technologies, such as block chain, artificial intelligence, and Dynamic Spectrum Sharing (allowing operators to use the same spectrum bands
for different radio access technologies), 6G will improve the overall quality and efficiency of command and control. It will allow the command
and control network to “achieve intelligent learning, mining, analysis and application of big data on the battlefield.” It will achieve intelligent
deployment of combat resources and give high-speed and accurate action orders. 6G will also provide real-time visualization of combat operations
to all those who need it and afford a higher degree and efficient system of security and logistics.
While China is determined and seemingly optimistic about the future potential and capabilities of 6G, some foreign analysts question whether
China is ready to take on such a feat. For example, the second article, published in the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post, features the
opinions of two foreign experts. The first expert argues that China is still struggling to control corruption and improve the quality and education
of its personnel force. The expert concludes that the Chinese military will be limited in its ability to absorb extremely advanced technology until
it can reach its goals of recruiting, training, and managing an educated, competent and non-corrupt personnel force. The second, Yang Zi, a senior
analyst with the China Program at Nanyang Technological University’s S Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, says that China
has been making clear progress in areas such as artificial intelligence, 5G, quantum technologies, unmanned systems, and supercomputing, “but
overall the U.S. still has the lead in new technologies.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)
Source: Xie Ruikun et al, “如果6G运用于未来作战 (If 6G is Used in Future Wars),” People’s Daily, 14 April 2020. http://military.people.
com.cn/n1/2020/0414/c1011-31672935.html
Promoting the gradual application of 6G in the military field may be one of the key focuses of the military to adapt to the transformation of military affairs in the
future.
The characteristics of 6G, such as mass connectivity, ultra-low latency, ultra-high network performance and other characteristics can be used to integrate users
and networks as a whole, and at the same time, play a role in artificial intelligence and multidimensional data perceptual learning as well as autonomous processing
functions. 6G …can accelerate the implementation of intelligence network by leaps and bounds.
Compared to the previous mobile technologies, 6G has more advantages. The value to military applications is huge. If it is used in the military field on a large scale, it
will certainly change the form of war.
…Through 6G, future unmanned reconnaissance equipment can be a key component of an intelligence reconnaissance network, battlefield mobile sensors, and a hub
of intelligence information. It can be integrated into the intelligence reconnaissance network, form its own network and deal with intelligence information in a highly
effective manner, thus realizing the integration of battlefield reconnaissance and intelligence network as well as the unmanned intelligence and information processing.
…The addition of technologies, such as 6G, artificial intelligence, block chain, Dynamic Spectrum Sharing and other technologies, will promote autonomous
intelligent management of future operational command and control networks. Among these technologies, 6G will achieve high efficiency, high reliability and large-scale
connectivity and other characteristics, to achieve efficient and accurate transmission of operational commands. Through 6G, the command and control network can
achieve intelligent learning, data-mining, analysis and application of big data on the battlefield, achieve intelligent deployment of combat resources, give high-speed
and accurate action orders, and improve command and control quality and efficiency.
... [6G] can allow efficient access to the combat network and high-speed transmission of troop positions, equipment, status and other information, to achieve efficient
communication between various combat units in the war zone so they can visualize each other and command the situation of battlefield without delay. The visualization
of operations can be achieved as well, eventually.
Through a 6G network, the integrated support information system can efficiently access the Command Information System, collect real-time information on battlefield
weapons, equipment, personnel, etc. and quickly create personalized support programs to enable support resources (logistics) to reach the front line while optimizing
the battlefield process work flow to achieve efficient and accurate security activities.

Source: Kristin Huang, “China’s Military Draws on 6G Dream to Modernise Fighting Forces and Plan Wartime Scenarios,” South China
Morning Post, 18 April 2020. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3080235/chinas-military-draws-6g-dream-modernisefighting-forces-and
China’s Military Draws on 6G Dream to Modernise Fighting Forces and Plan Wartime Scenarios
Timothy Heath, a senior defence researcher at the Rand Corporation, a US think tank, said despite China’s ambitious plan, it was risky for Beijing to try to achieve too
much at once. “The PLA is still building the basic organisation of a modern, joint military after decades operating as a low-skill, low-technology force,” he said.
“It is also struggling to control corruption and improve the quality and education of the personnel force.
“Until the PLA has achieved its goals of recruiting, training and managing an educated, competent and non-corrupt personnel force, there will be limits to how much
the military can absorb extremely advanced technology.”
Yang Zi, a senior analyst with the China Programme at Nanyang Technological University’s S Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, said …
“We have seen China making clear progress in [artificial intelligence], 5G, quantum technologies, unmanned systems and supercomputers. But overall, the US still has
the lead in new technologies.”

OE Watch | June 2020

28

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Researchers Demonstrate Mobile Quantum
Satellite Base Station
OE Watch Commentary: In late December, a
Chinese mobile quantum satellite ground station, the
first of its kind in the world, successfully connected
to Micius, a quantum testbed satellite 500 km above
in orbit. The connection or “handshake” described in
the accompanying article is the negotiation between
two communication systems that allow data to be
transmitted. Afterward it was able to exchange secret
keys, the information used to encrypt and decrypt
information in an encryption scheme. Passing this
information through quantum links ensures their
security.
Micius, also called Mozi after the ancient Chinese
philosopher, is part of Quantum Experiments at Space
Scale (QUESS), one of the scientific experiments
under China’s space science Strategic Priority
Program. The satellite was launched on 16 August
2016 by the Chinese Academy of Sciences with the
goal of helping make breakthroughs in long-distance
quantum communications.
According to Dr. Pan Jianwei [潘建伟], the main
goals of the program are quantum key distribution
from a satellite to ground station, a global-scale
quantum communication network that uses satellites
and fiber-optic cables, long-range entanglement
testing involving two ground stations over 1,000
kilometers apart and a satellite, and ground-tosatellite teleportation (sending quantum information
from one location to another).
Quantum Key distribution is a means of secure communication that takes advantage of the properties of quantum physics. In June 2017, China
successfully entangled photons at two ground stations 1203 km apart, relayed through Micius. Successful links were later established between
Beijing and Vienna. Chinese leaders see their communications as very vulnerable to interception, as evidenced by a campaign to divest Chinese
networks of US-made servers and other equipment.
To communicate with the satellite, China has built a number of ground stations across the country as part of its experimentation with long-range
quantum communications. The key research lab and coordinating center for the project are based in Hefei [合肥], Anhui province with ground
stations in Nanshan [南山], Xinjiang, Ngari (Ali [阿里]) Tibet, Delingha [德令哈], Qinghai and Xinglong [兴隆], Hebei province. Austrian labs in
Vienna and Graz are also part of the ground-station network.
Developed by the University of Science and Technology of China, QuantumCTek Co., Ltd. and the Jinan Quantum Technology Research
Institute [济南量子技术研究院], the mobile station is based in Jinan, Shandong province.
China has several mobile satellite ground stations that support the national network, ensuring monitoring and communication with the growing
number of satellite constellations. While the “bucket-size” telescope and accompanying transmission equipment are dwarfed by the radar dishes
of the other mobile stations, the quantum base station nevertheless represents an important breakthrough.
As noted by Zhang Qiang [张强], the executive dean of the Jinan Institute, the new system is much smaller than the other ground stations used
by the program in the past and opens the door to the commercialization of the technology.
As the second accompanying excerpt reports, in addition to the January deployment of the mobile station, in May, the QUESS program
successfully transferred time-synchronization data securely using quantum communications. This is an important step toward building secure
satellite navigation systems. China hopes to deploy the technology widely across many technological fields to improve the overall security of
communications while making advances in the field of quantum physics. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

OE Watch | June 2020

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Researchers Demonstrate Mobile
Quantum Satellite Base Station
“This mobile quantum satellite ground station represents a breakthrough in
the commercialization of quantum technology. The ground station used for
the launch of Micius weighed more than a dozen tons. After thousands of
experiments, the researchers successfully miniaturized the ground station,
significantly reducing the manufacturing cost. The portable station can be
loaded onto vehicles anytime and anywhere, giving it great commercialization
potential in the future.”
— Zhang Qiang [张强], professor at the University of Science and Technology
of China and executive dean of the Jinan Institute of Quantum Technology

Source: “全球首个可移动量子卫星地面站与 ‘墨子号’ 成功握手 (World’s First Mobile Quantum Satellite Ground Station Successfully
Executes ‘Handshake’ with ‘Micius’ Satellite),” S&T Daily, 2 January 2020. http://scitech.people.com.cn/n1/2020/0102/c1007-31531958.html
On 30 December 2019, between 23:31 and 23:39, on the roof of the Jinan Quantum Technology Research Institute, the mobile quantum
satellite ground station emitted a red light, looking for a little green light passing through the sky. The “red” and the “green” “shook hands,”
achieving satellite-to-ground linkup. The green light was emitted by the Micius quantum satellite that was launched in 2016. Today, with
the transit of “Micius” and its subsequent handshake with the mobile quantum satellite ground station, a massive encrypted transmission of
information was completed in a matter of minutes.
The first linkup of the world’s first mobile quantum satellite ground station with Micius lasted about eight minutes. Once the linkup is
complete, Micius can transmit the secret key and the ground station in Jinan can receive it and conduct a secret key test.
The Jinan Quantum Technology Research Institute kicked off the miniaturized quantum communication satellite ground station system
project in 2019; the ground station was completed on 24 December. The successful handshake test with the “Micius” quantum scientific
experimental satellite marked the completion of China’s first miniaturized mobile quantum satellite ground station in Jinan.
This ground station is about the size of a paint bucket and weighs a little over 80 kilograms. Adding a 28 cm telescope and equipment turns
it into a mobile quantum satellite ground station. This project was undertaken together by the University of Science and Technology of China,
QuantumCTek Co., Ltd. and Jinan Quantum Technology Research Institute.
Zhang Qiang [张强], professor of the University of Science and Technology of China and executive dean of the Jinan Institute of Quantum
Technology, explained that this mobile quantum satellite ground station represents a breakthrough in the commercialization of quantum
technology. The ground station used for the launch of Micius weighed more than a dozen tons. After thousands of experiments, the
researchers successfully miniaturized the ground station, significantly reducing the manufacturing cost. The portable station can be loaded
onto vehicles anytime and anywhere, giving it great commercialization potential in the future.
At present, the Jinan Quantum Communication Test Network has been successfully connected to the “Beijing-Shanghai Main Line“ and has
become an important part of China’s wide-area quantum communication network.
Source: “Chinese experts use quantum satellite to ensure time information security,” Xinhua, 14 May 2020. http://global.chinadaily.com.
cn/a/202005/14/WS5ebc9f35a310a8b2411558f9.html
Experts used China’s quantum satellite -- Quantum Experiments at Space Scale (QUESS) -- to verify quantum-secure time transfer for the
first time, which laid a foundation for building a safe satellite navigation system.

OE Watch | June 2020

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Information on COVID-19 in the PLA
OE Watch Commentary: As of mid-May, the Chinese government maintained that its military was spared by coronavirus
infections. The accompanying excerpt from the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post reported on 9 May that the Chinese
defense ministry, “the world’s largest armed force – with about 2.3 million personnel – has had zero confirmed cases of COVID-19.”
The article contrasted that with the rate of infections in both the US and Russian militaries, which had 4,000 and 1,000 cases
respectively, at that time. Regardless of the validity of this claim, some analysts believed the force, as a whole, was being negatively
impacted. Due to safety concerns, the PLA’s annual spring recruitment program was postponed until August. According to an
Australia-based analyst cited in the article, this could be a problem because the PLA is still a conscription army and has a large
turnover of soldiers every year. Therefore, “the late recruitment and training plan this year…has already affected combat
effectiveness.”
The article offered some thought-provoking points, and questioned the validity of China’s claims of having zero military personnel affected.
Foreign analysts argued that, even if China’s claims were true, they were unlikely to remain that way. For one thing, over 4,000 military
medical personnel played an important role in China’s response to the COVID-19 breakout in Wuhan, which had been at the epicenter of
infections prior to spreading across the globe. The article noted, “The idea that none of these personnel working on the front lines in Wuhan
became infected by the novel coronavirus would be inconsistent with the experiences of countries from around the world.” It also pointed out a
17 February report in the PLA Daily, which reported that some soldiers were placed in quarantine, and claimed that this had led to rumors that
the Chinese military had been affected by the coronavirus.
Finally, the article pointed out one advantage in China’s corner, compared to the United States: Chinese military operations (at least for now)
are mostly limited to the mainland, unlike the United States, which “has a large [international] range of missions and tasks.” According to the
author, this makes containment relatively less complicated. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The PLA played an important role in China’s response to the
coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan … The idea that none of these
personnel working on the front lines in Wuhan became infected by
the novel coronavirus would be inconsistent with the experiences
of countries from around the world...”
Source: Kristin Huang, “Coronavirus Spares China’s Armed Forces but Disrupts PLA Modernization Plans,” South China Morning Post, 9
May 2020. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3082877/coronavirus-spares-chinas-armed-forces-disrupts-pla
Coronavirus Spares China’s Armed Forces but Disrupts PLA Modernization Plans
According to China’s defence ministry, the world’s largest armed force – with about 2.3 million personnel – has had zero confirmed cases of
Covid-19. In contrast, the US and Russian militaries, ranked second- and third-largest in the world, have reported more than 4,000 and 1,000
respectively.
“The PLA is still a conscription army and, given its large turnover of soldiers every year and the late recruitment and training plan
this year, the coronavirus pandemic has already affected combat effectiveness,” said Adam Ni, director of the China Policy Centre, an
independent, non-profit research organisation based in Canberra, Australia.
“The PLA played an important role in China’s response to the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan … The idea that none of these personnel
working on the front lines in Wuhan became infected by the novel coronavirus would be inconsistent with the experiences of countries from
around the world,” he said.
More than 4,000 military medical workers were sent to Wuhan as part of China’s effort to contain the outbreak at ground zero – which
included the rapid-built emergency field facility, the Huoshenshan hospital – and their efforts were highlighted in a documentary screened
recently by state broadcaster CCTV.
… rumours were rampant that the Chinese military had been affected by the coronavirus, fueled by a report on February 17 by the official
PLA Daily that some soldiers had been placed in quarantine and Yu Qiusong, captain of the Changzhou type 054A frigate, was isolating in a
guest house. The news report did not mention why the personnel were in quarantine.
“The US is a globally distributed force while the Chinese military largely operates on the mainland. The US thus faces challenges in
containing the disease that the Chinese military does not have to face … and the US military has a large range of missions and tasks it carries
out to counter threats to its allies and partners, as well as to US security. This complicates efforts by the US military to carry out disease
control measures.”

OE Watch | June 2020

31

INDO-PACIFIC
China: Elevating the Status and Role of the People’s
Armed Police Force
OE Watch Commentary: During the 17th session of the Standing Committee
of the 13th National People’s Congress, officials submitted a draft amendment on
China’s Law on the People’s Armed Police Force (PAP). The amendment seeks to
boost the scope of responsibilities of the PAP, place it under centralized command,
and obtain more resources. The accompanying two extracts from articles published
in Global Times and South China Morning Post respectively, discuss the proposed
changes (which are pending approval as of mid-May), and some of the motivations
behind them.
According to the first article, the scope of responsibility of the PAP, which
previously had covered domestic affairs, such as rescue, disaster relief, and antiterrorism, will now extend to maritime law enforcement. The PAP, which the
report states fell under the State Council until 2018, when it was consolidated with
China’s Coast Guard, will now fall under a command held by the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China and the Central Military Commission, both of
which are chaired by Chinese President Xi Jinping.
A squad of the People’s Armed Police stands in formation in the
of the Forbidden City, in Beijing, PRC in 2007.
The second article points out that the PAP controls the country’s coast guard, and Source:courtyard
BrokenSphere via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:People%27s_Armed_
Police_squad_2.JPG, CC-BY-SA 3.0
that China’s move to boost the power of the PAP and the role of the coastguard in
maritime law enforcement come amid renewed tensions with neighboring states in the South China Sea. The amendment calls for the armed police
to join a national intelligence-sharing network and to get more funding “commensurate with its duties and development.” As the second article
mentions, the amendment is aimed at giving the party more control over the armed police, which now has more important duties than it did in the
past. This is consistent with other steps China has been taking over the past five years toward the modernization and restructuring of its armed
forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“The amendment aimed to give the party more control over the
armed police, which had more important duties than in the past.”
Source: Zhang Han, “China’s Armed Police to Join Maritime Law Enforcement: Draft Amendment,” Global Times, 27 April 2020. http://
www.globaltimes.cn/content/1186904.shtml
China’s Armed Police to Join Maritime Law Enforcement: Draft Amendment
A draft amendment to China’s Law on the People’s Armed Police Force (PAP) has added sections about organization and command, and extended the troops’ scope of
responsibilities to cover domestic affairs as well as maritime law enforcement…
The main addition in the amendment is a new chapter on “Organization and Command,” and the chapter “Missions and Duty” was divided into two chapters,
“Mission” and “Function and Power.”
In the reforms, command of the PAP is jointly held by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the Central Military Commission. The status of the
armed police force was no longer subordinate to the State Council, China’s cabinet, as of 2018, when China reformed the dual command structure.
In March 2018, civilian functions like armed police gold force, forestry and public security forces (border control and firefighting) were severed from the PAP, and the
China Coast Guard was consolidated with PAP.

Source: Kristin Huang, “Beijing Seeks Boost for Armed Police, Coastguard as Tensions Rise in South China Sea,” South China Morning
Post, 27 April 2020. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3081789/beijing-seeks-boost-armed-police-coastguard-tensions-risesouth
Beijing Seeks Boost for Armed Police, Coastguard as Tensions Rise in South China Sea
China is moving to boost the power of its armed police and the role of its coastguard in maritime law enforcement at a time of renewed tensions with its neighbors in
the South China Sea.
China’s 1.5 million-strong armed police is a paramilitary force mainly responsible for internal security, riot control, anti-terrorism, law enforcement and protecting
maritime rights. The country’s coastguard, whose vessels are increasingly seen in the disputed waters of the South China Sea, is controlled by the armed police.
The amendment seeks to move the armed police directly under the command of the Communist Party’s Central Committee as well as the Central Military Commission
(CMC), both of which are chaired by President Xi Jinping. It has been under CMC control since 2017.
It calls for a more efficient organizational and command system, and for the armed police to join a national intelligence-sharing network. The armed police would also
get more funding “commensurate with its duties and development”, according to the report.
The revision now awaits review and approval by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress.
Peng Peng, vice-president of the Guangdong System Reform Research Society, a think tank, said the amendment aimed to give the party more control over the armed
police, which had more important duties than in the past.

OE Watch | June 2020

32

INDO-PACIFIC
A Look at the PLA’s Combat Medical Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: While attention has
recently focused on PLA medical personnel mobilized
to address the COVID-19 pandemic, the accompanying
article from the Shanghai-based Xinmin Evening News
discusses the types of equipment used by the PLA’s
medical teams. The article notes the improvements to
the equipment over time, particularly after the PLA’s
experiences with conflicts in 1974 and 1979 made it
clear that they needed dedicated armored vehicles,
ships and aircraft.
For the army, its experiences in the 1979 war with
Vietnam highlighted the need for a dedicated armored
ambulance that could safely transport wounded
personnel to the rear areas. As explained in the
article, successive generations of armored personnel
chassis were converted to this role, with the most
recent generations featuring larger compartments,
and superior medical equipment. Wheeled (Type 08)
and amphibious (Type 05) variants have also been
deployed, the latter with the PLA Navy Marine Corps.
In 2014, the PLA held its first large-scale exercise at the Zhurihe Combined Arms Training Base in Inner Mongolia to test how combat medics
and supporting vehicles would perform in modern, informationized conditions. Mission-2014 [卫勤使命-2014] focused on realistic tests of largescale use of combat ambulances, and joint operations and vehicle airdrops. In recent years, the Type 04 and Type 08 armored ambulances have
participated in the “Combined Aid,” [联合救援] series medical training exercises held with China and Germany in 2016 and 2019.
Experience in the 1970s also shaped views about the need for dedicated medical facilities aboard ships or more specialized hospital ships. In
1974, during a clash with South Vietnam over the Paracel Islands in the South China sea, wounded personnel were hundreds of nautical miles
away from medical facilities on Hainan Island, and due to the lack of required multiple shifts between vessels before arriving at their destination.
In 1981, a passenger ship was converted into the first hospital ship Nankang [南康]. China’s first large-scale hospital ship, the Peace Ark [和平方
舟], entered service in 2008 and has deployed multiple times globally on humanitarian missions.
The PLA has also converted the Y-9 medium transport aircraft into a medical rescue aircraft that flies missions to man-made reefs in the South
China Sea and areas of the Tibetan plateau. Other Chinese media coverage of these missions noted that these aircraft, paired with the deployment
of helicopters either based on islands or aboard ships, mark a significant increase in capabilities. Other incidents reported mention that personnel
from remote garrisons on these features would be required to be transported via helicopter from the island to a ship, and sometimes to a second
ship in a relay before landing in Hainan. More recently the Z-18 heavy-lift helicopter has also been converted into a dedicated medical rescue
variant.
With at least three classes of armored vehicles, specialized medical rescue ships and aircraft as well as large-scale training exercises, it is clear
that improving its combat medical capabilities is a priority for the PLA. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Since 2000, accompanying the large-scale deployment of a new generation [of]
armored vehicles, it was determined that the previous generation of armored
ambulances cannot meet current requirements for maneuverability or provide
adequate medical services. A new generation of armored ambulances was shown
for the first time during the “Medical Mission-2014” exercise in 2014.”

OE Watch | June 2020

33

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: A Look at the PLA’s Combat Medical
Capabilities
Source: “Wang Xiaomeng [王笑梦] Zhang Shaohua [张韶华], “战场救护神 - 解放军卫勤保障装备撷英 (Amazing Battlefield Rescue
– Selections of PLA Medical Service Equipment),” Xinmin Evening News [新民晚报], 10 February 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/
politics/2019-04/24/c_1124411852.htm
Nationwide, the “people’s war” against the Coronavirus is ongoing. Medical personnel from the People’s Liberation Army are waging an
intense fight on the frontlines with the virus, showing their iron resolve. People are also curious: What kind of equipment is used by our
military medical personnel? Are they as important as the better-known tanks and warships?
Before 1979, our military did not have armored ambulances. During the Sino-Vietnamese War (that began in February 1979), it was difficult
to locate the wounded or remove them from the front line when found. To fill this gap, our military developed the WZ750 armored ambulance
based on the Type-81 tracked armored command vehicle. The vehicle has two crew, a driver and the captain (who also crewed a machine
gun), and could carry two medical personnel, a doctor and a medical assistant, and four seriously injured laying down or eight slightly
injured in the sitting position. The vehicle is equipped with four stretchers and two standard first-aid kits. The medical crew was equipped to
stop bleeding, provide oxygen, provide blood transfusions or IV drips and set fractures.
The WZ750 is an emergency vehicle and based on a smaller chassis so its internal space is not very large. To better meet the requirements of
realistic combat scenarios, in the mid-1980s, China successively developed the WZ751 armored ambulance on based on the 85-type chassis,
and then the WZ753 based on the Type 89. Both vehicles featured greater indoor space, as well as high-power air-conditioning and heating to
maintain the interior temperature in extreme weather conditions, and greatly improve passenger comfort. Additionally, our military developed
an amphibious armored ambulance using the Type 77 amphibious transport vehicle.
Since 2000, accompanying the large-scale deployment of a new generation armored vehicles, it was determined that the previous generation
of armored ambulances cannot meet current requirements for maneuverability or provide adequate medical services. A new generation of
armored ambulances was shown for the first time during the “Medical Mission-2014” exercise in 2014. The new ambulance was based on the
chassis of the tracked Type 04 infantry fighting vehicle, which had a longer continuous track than previous vehicles. A longer chassis means
that the ambulance cabin can be larger and carry more medical equipment. The new vehicle was designed to better carry out combat medical
missions in “informationized” conditions; wounded soldiers’ conditions are reported to the field hospital during transport to allow them
to prepare procedures or have doctors perform remote diagnoses. Our military has also developed amphibious armored ambulances and
wheeled armored ambulances based on the Type 05 amphibious assault vehicle and Type 08 wheeled armored transport vehicles.

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | June 2020

34

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s COVID-19 “Letter Diplomacy”
OE Watch Commentary: The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has been quick
to capitalize on its handling of the coronavirus and is directing its various influence
organizations to diplomatic inroads around the world. As explained in the excerpted
article, on 11 March, for example, the International Liaison Department (ILD), also known
as the International Department, sent letters to the leaders of over 110 political parties in
more than 60 countries, introducing China’s experience and practices in preventing and
controlling the COVID-19 outbreak.
Established in 1951, the ILD is a central organization within the CCP. Organizations
within CCP operate in parallel or within the ministries of the State Council but hold
greater power and make important decisions. While the ILD played a much more limited
role during the Cold War, liaising with Communist or socialist parties, it has since become
the CCP’s direct line to political parties worldwide. These meetings often go hand in
hand with outreach from the United Front Work Department, China’s most well-known
organization for exercising political influence at home and abroad.
While its officials sometimes have backgrounds working in the Foreign Ministry,
including its current head, Song Tao [宋涛], it is wrong to think of the ILD as subordinate.
China’s Ministry of Defense, for example, is a minor office compared to the CCP and State
Central Military Commissions. The membership of both organizations is identical, with
authority over the PLA ultimately laying with the CCP organization. Not surprisingly,
Song Tao and the ILD have been major players in China’s relations with North Korea,
representing the CCP’s direct contact with the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea.
The department describes itself as “focused on [the] development of healthy and stable
relations with other countries” and “striving to build a network of parties and governments
and people across all levels of society.” Its goal is to “comprehensively introduce our
Party’s philosophy of governance and policy,” and “Tell China’s story and convey China’s
voice,” promoting the Party’s image globally.

Song Tao, 2019.

Source: Karl Norman Alonoz for the Presidential Communications Operations Office, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Song_Tao_2019_(cropped).jpg, Public domain

Promoting China’s response to the virus is a natural outgrowth of these goals, and it appears to be having an effect. The article notes that as of
mid-March, Xi Jinping and the CCP Central Committee had received over 500 messages of condolence and letters of sympathy from 300 political
parties and organizations from 120 countries. Just as the CCP’s United Front Work’s cultivation of business and cultural groups globally helped
China acquire necessary protective equipment to deal with the virus in the early months of this year (often to the consternation of countries that
saw their domestic supplies evaporate), the ILD actively engages with the political parties of other countries to help set the tone of diplomatic
relations and normalize the CCP’s view of governance.
There is, however, a broader picture. The excerpted article from March also notes that beyond sharing experiences with the virus, the ILD is
promoting the CCP’s vision for a “community of shared future for mankind” [人类命运共同体], an umbrella for China’s push for an international
system that supports rather than opposes its “national rejuvenation.” At the end of April, Zhou Li [周力], former deputy head of the ILD wrote
in Kunlun Policy Online [《昆仑策网》], an independent but pro-government online journal, that in response to US efforts to “contain China,
the primary task in establishing a united front under the New Situation is to consciously plan and unite more countries to contain and resist the
unilateralism and power politics that the United States recklessly promotes.” To achieve this goal, he believes, China will need to be more active
in promoting its vision of global affairs, and go beyond “letter diplomacy.” End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“Since the outbreak, various political parties around the world have paid great
attention to the prevention and control efforts in China and offered full recognition
and active support. Many political parties and dignitaries from around the world
have called and written to the International Liaison Department to express their
condolences and support. To date, more than 500 messages of condolence and letters
of sympathy have been sent to General Secretary Xi Jinping and the CCP Central
Committee by 300 political parties and organizations from 120 countries.”
OE Watch | June 2020

35

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s COVID-19 “Letter Diplomacy”
Source: “中联部创新” 致信外交” 通过政党渠道分享中国战” 疫” 经验 (International Liaison Department’s innovative use of “letter
diplomacy” through channels to political parties to share China’s experience combating the COVID-19 outbreak),” International Department
of the CCP Central Committee, 13 March 2020. https://www.idcpc.org.cn/bzhd/smwz/202003/t20200313_137707.html
On 11 March, the International Liaison Department of the CCP Central Committee sent letters to the leaders of more than 110 political
parties in more than 60 countries, introducing China’s experience and practices in preventing and controlling the COVID-19 outbreak.
The International Liaison Department said that this “letter diplomacy” represents the first time since the COVID-19 outbreak that China
has systematically introduced its practices and experience in combating the epidemic to foreign parties through political party channels, and
is an important initiative of the CCP to actively establish a new-type of inter-party relations with political parties around the world that seek
common ground while reserving differences, respect each other and learn from each other.
According to reporters from the International Liaison Department, in the letter, Minister Song Tao outlined the current prevention and
control efforts in combating COVID-19 in China, comprehensively sharing China’s takeaways and methods with respect to a number of areas.
Highlights include: General Secretary Xi Jinping’s personal orders, which resulted in the rapid establishment of an efficient joint prevention
and control mechanism; the control of sources of infection and the cutting off of transmission channels; the mobilization of national efforts
to support the hardest-hit areas; the reliance on science and technology to promote prevention and control of the epidemic; the balancing of
prevention and control efforts with the overall economic and social development needs; and the strengthening of international coordination
and cooperation.
The International Liaison Department stressed that the Communist Party of China has always put the safety and health of the people first,
and General Secretary Xi Jinping has exercised command and made a series of major decisions on epidemic prevention and control in a
timely manner, providing direction and impetus to the work. With the concerted efforts of the whole country, the spread of the epidemic in
China has been basically curbed, the situation of prevention and control is gradually improving, and the order of production and life is
restored at an accelerated pace.
The International Liaison Department points out that, while fighting the coronavirus outbreak, China has been sharing information about
the epidemic with the international community in a timely manner in an open, transparent and responsible manner and has actively engaged
in international cooperation to combat the pandemic, an effort which has been received positively by the World Health Organization and the
international community. In the face of the grim situation of the rapid spread of the virus globally, the CPC is ready to work with political
parties around the world to strengthen exchanges and close communication, share experience in combating epidemics, coordinate measures
to combat the virus, maintain regional and international public health security, promote common prosperity and development in all countries
of the world and promote the building of a community of human destiny.
It is understood that since the outbreak, various political parties around the world have paid great attention to the prevention and control
efforts in China and offered full recognition and active support. Many political parties and dignitaries from around the world have called and
written to the International Liaison Department to express their condolences and support. To date, more than 500 messages of condolence
and letters of sympathy have been sent to General Secretary Xi Jinping and the CCP Central Committee by 300 political parties and
organizations from 120 countries. At present, the situation of epidemic prevention and control in China is gradually improving, and it is
necessary for the Chinese Communist Party to inform all parties of the positive progress of epidemic prevention and control in China and
respond to the concerns and support of all parties.
In addition, the Communist Party of China empathizes with many countries in the world, as the virus continues to spread around the world.
The letter highlights a series of practices adopted by China to promote the prevention and control of the epidemic and economic and social
development in an integrated manner, in an effort to share its experience with political parties in a timely manner and provide relevant
lessons for countries to prevent the spread of the epidemic. This reflects the Communist Party of China’s high level of responsibility for global
public health and safety and its mission to build a community of shared future for mankind.

OE Watch | June 2020

36

INDO-PACIFIC
Chinese Views of Public Opinion Warfare
OE Watch Commentary: In late April, the editor of the
Journal of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Lin
Yueqin [林跃勤] wrote an article laying out how China
could improve the effectiveness of its foreign messaging.
The accompanying passages from that article highlight
her suggested actions to “win the public opinion war,”
particularly during the current pandemic.
Against the background of the coronavirus and its
intensification of tensions between China and other
countries, Lin argues that in response to foreign media
attacks “we must dare to speak up and ‘draw the sword’
[亮剑], to counter provocative, defamatory, slanderous
accusations.” Specifically, Lin calls for Chinese media to
“prepare” for attacks from foreign media by studying how
it works; monitoring US media and foreign public opinion
24-hours a day to be prepared to deliver responses at a
moment’s notice; improve public trust through improved
transparency (in some areas); and diversify use of nontraditional media including social media. Lin also calls for
a mobilization of “China-friendly” scholars to write articles
on foreign platforms, improve empathic communication
CGTN logo.
Source: CGTN via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CGTN.png, Public Domain
and use statistics to create the impression of impartiality,
improve training and recruitment for foreign communications, including hiring foreigners to help improve fluency.
It should be noted that the article does not represent an articulation of official policy, but it is a call to action. In fact, China already engages in
many of these practices: Global Times, China Daily, CCTV, and others all have foreigners writing op-eds, delivering TV broadcasts and acting
as editors. There is active engagement with China scholars who are interviewed for comments. There are also a number of publications that are
clearly connected to United Front organizations, but are able to recruit foreign academics to publish with them. While some of these articles are
critical of China, their work is interspersed with that of Chinese authors connected to political or influence work, sanitizing the more politicallydriven work and presenting a “fair” perspective. The author specifically calls for expansion of this “sympathetic communication.”
Chinese Foreign Ministry officials, once silent on social media, have become quite active. Hua Chunying, the FM spokesperson, even engages
with online spats with her counterparts in other countries, something that would have been unimaginable just a few years ago.
Beyond the new platforms and upgraded websites, the suggestions described in the article fit naturally into Chinese leaders’ understanding
of information warfare, including public opinion warfare, psychological warfare, and legal warfare—collectively better known in English as
the “Three Warfares.” One military textbook describes the “main task” of public opinion struggle as to “unify the ideological will of (your
own countries’) military and civilians.” Later passages describe seizing initiative as a priority to quickly defeat enemy narratives domestically,
restricting dissemination of enemy information, and “shocking” the enemy.
Other texts make it clear that Chinese leaders view international competition as “systems confrontation”—China’s hard and soft power pitted in
a struggle with other nations. The tools suggested by Lin, then, are simply part of a modernization program for that particular part of the Chinese
arsenal.
Particularly over the past two decades, China has vastly improved its ability to project its voice into other countries. One of the most visible
media is China Global Television Network (CGTN), the international channels of China’s state-run China Central TV network. Its channels create
content for various regions, with a political twist. The much older China Radio International (CRI), which dates to the 1940s, for example reports
and broadcast in over 40 languages and has nearly 70 overseas affiliate radio stations. End OE Watch Commentary (Wood)

“In response to the dramatic increase in foreign media’s discussions of China and
anti-China sentiment during major public incidents, we should consider establishing
a response mechanism (network) for monitoring foreign public opinions with the
joint participation of government media, private media, media work associations,
diplomatic departments, important enterprises, think tanks, etc.”
OE Watch | June 2020

37

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Chinese Views of Public Opinion Warfare
Source: 林跃勤 (Lin Yueqin), “着力提升因应外部对华舆论攻击能力 (Enhancing [China’s] Ability to Respond to Public Opinion Attacks
from Abroad),” Journal of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences [中国社会科学报], 24 April 2020. www.cssn.cn/zk/wjyya/202004/
t20200424_5118468.shtml
In the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, some overseas media outlets, especially media from the United States, launched a new round
of public opinion attacks on China, which has severely hampered the Chinese, as well as global efforts, against the pandemic. In response to
attacks of this nature, we must dare to speak up and ‘draw the sword’ [亮剑], to counter provocative, defamatory, slanderous accusations
from overseas media and their methods of “shirking responsibilities.” We should also seek to understand the mechanism behind the spread
of negative public opinion during major emergencies and craft our responses. We must enhance Chinaʼs outward communication capability
and influence in service of the goals of maintaining Chinaʼs international image, strengthening Chinaʼs national soft power, promoting
international cooperation, improving our responses to public health crises, and building a community of shared future for mankind.
The fundamental focus areas for winning the public opinion war during a pandemic include the following:
First, raise awareness of the need to respond to a public opinion crisis in the event of an emergency. In the face of the aggressive insults
against China and anti-China public opinion and sentiment from the United States and others, in order to rectify the situation and defend our
reputation, rights and interests, we need to take stock of the situation, gain an in-depth understanding of the characteristics and trends of the
attacks against us by the United States media and other media, think deeply about them, and respond to them in a rational and appropriate
manner.
Second, establish a coordination mechanism for monitoring information transmission during major public incidents. In response to the
dramatic increase in foreign media’s discussions of China and anti-China sentiment during major public incidents, we should consider
establishing a response mechanism (network) for monitoring foreign public opinions with the joint participation of government media, private
media, media work associations, diplomatic departments, important enterprises, think tanks, etc. This mechanism will enable the round-theclock monitoring of the dynamics of major foreign media such as those in the United States, which will in turn enable quick and powerful
responses and counter-attacks to statements that denigrate, slander and attack us, triggering negative international perceptions. Such a
mechanism must cover a wide area, including the sources of the negative information, so as to stop or reduce the continuous fermentation of
the negative impact caused by foreign media outlets.
Thirdly, the role of media supervision should be used to enhance trust, dispel doubts and enhance the country’s capacity to respond to public
events. In response to the foreign media’s criticism of our shortcomings, such as slow handling of the epidemic at the beginning, ineffective
measures, concealment of incident reports, suppression of whistle blowers, substandard export of PPEs and other medical supplies, and the
high rate of error in testing kits, our media should, on the one hand, objectively and impartially describe the real situation to the outside
world and not cover up, deny or take sides over the shortcomings that have been proven to exist. Our media should tell the international
audience that the Chinese Government is constantly improving its methods, enhancing its pandemic prevention capacity, strengthening
cooperation with WHO and other countries, sharing information and experience, and providing assistance, so as to clarify doubts and
counter unfounded accusations. On the other hand, it is also necessary to inform the relevant government departments, medical institutions
and business organizations of the shortcomings exposed in the process of epidemic prevention and foreign assistance, so as to improve the
system, optimize policies, strengthen supervision, and improve product and service quality.
Fourth, to promote the construction of a diversified body of media capable of international communications. In view of the fact that
pluralistic voices are one of the major trends in international communication, international audiences are more inclined to accept voices
from unofficial media. In order to adapt to the trend of pluralism, marketization and socialization of communication, especially in the context
of the restriction placed on Chinese state-owned media institutions by the United States, In addition to efforts to strengthen the state media’s
foreign influence, we need to consider supporting and strengthening the internationalization of non-state-owned media outlets and giving
full play to the role of non-mainstream media in China’s foreign influence campaign. These private media outlets include platforms such as
private radio and television, publishing houses, online platforms, and social platforms such as WeChat, Weibo, and TikTok. We should help
build these private media outlets into internationally recognizable brands capable of countering platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, and
YouTuber. We should also encourage and mobilize enterprises, organizations, think tanks, experts and scholars, as well as foreign experts and
scholars friendly to China, to speak out and write articles on foreign communication platforms.
Fifth, the capacity and level of sympathetic communication should be improved through innovation in external communication methods and
approaches, so as to establish an objective, fair and credible media image. In response to the various smears, accusations, denunciations and
“dumping of the pot” by the United States media, we must be adept at grasping their main points and logical flaws and forcefully refute them
on the basis of facts, data and the authoritative claims of international organizations, international forums and rational and impartial public
opinion in the United States. …
Sixth, we should strengthen training for external campaign talents. We should cultivate a team of communication talents who are familiar
with the laws of media operation and trends of public opinion outside China and who are skilled in writing commentaries in foreign
languages; employ members of the foreign media or think-tank experts who have extensive media experience and who share China’s
philosophy and are friendly to China, and improve the localization level (including editing) of Chinese media in foreign markets.
…

OE Watch | June 2020

38

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s COVID-19 Information Campaign is Backfiring in
Europe
OE Watch Commentary: Following the coronavirus outbreak, China launched an aggressive, global information campaign, in an effort to
influence the narrative through its government-controlled broadcasters, publications, and social media. To this end, it also sent aid and medical
expertise to many countries. However, there are signs that some of these initiatives may be backfiring in parts of Europe. The accompanying
passages from European sources discuss China’s misinformation campaigns and highlight calls in certain European capitals (UK and Spain) to
hold China accountable, and even rethink their engagement with China.
The first accompanying passage is from EUvsDisinfo, a European project established in 2015 to address Russia’s “disinformation campaigns
affecting the European Union, its Member States, and countries in the shared neighborhood.” In a late-April report discussing all misinformation
around the COVID-19 pandemic, the report notes evidence “of a coordinated push by official Chinese sources to deflect any blame for the outbreak
of the pandemic and publicizing announcements and deliveries of bilateral assistance...” The report also points out that “Chinese officials and
state media try to curtail any mentions of Wuhan as the origin of COVID-19... Some state-controlled social media channels continue to spread the
theory of the outbreak in Wuhan being linked to US military representatives, indicating a continued intent to spread confusion about the origin
of the virus.”
The report calls out covert Chinese operations on social media, including a network on Twitter “involved in a coordinated influence campaign”
with ties to the Chinese government. It notes the discovery of “a coordinated operation of Twitter bots in Italy amplifying messages of the Chinese
embassy and attacking the EU. Thousands of tweets with pro-China hashtags published in a two-week period in March came from bots.” Also,
it highlights a report that Chinese state media has circumvented social media platforms’ political ad rules and bought advertising that praised
China’s handling of the COVID-19/Coronavirus crisis and attacked the US.
While this effort may be working in some countries (the report notes the findings of an Italian polling firm that shows an increase in Italians who
consider China as friendly), it is backfiring in others. As the second passage from the notable British newspaper The Guardian reports, “the UK
Parliament is now full of PRC-skeptics.” It notes that the Chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee recently published a report critical of the Chinese
authorities’ approach to data and set up the China Research Group (CRG), “to inform the debate on Beijing’s economic and diplomatic policies.”
The article notes “they are concerned about the transparency of China’s strategic investments in UK, amongst other issues.” This Member of
Parliament is also “focusing on rethinking Britain’s engagement with China,” and the CRG put forward an idea to hold China accountable for the
misinformation around COVID-19.
Similarly, a Spanish Member of the European Parliament recently wrote a commentary in the New Europe entitled, “Europe debates: Is China
the new global threat?” calling out China for lying and misinformation about the outbreak, and holding it directly responsible due to its leadership
keeping silent and misleading the world. He expands this to other concerns with China, focusing on China’s stealing of intellectual property.
It has not helped that China’s medical masks have turned out to be defective, and have been rejected by Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria
and Italy. As the passages note, the current climate has led to the reconsideration of many other issues related to China, ranging from intellectual
property, to its interference in the Hong Kong judiciary, to its activity around Taiwan and in the South China Sea. This would suggest that China’s
aggressive public diplomacy around the pandemic might be backfiring in parts of Europe. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“In a published letter to First Minister Raab, Tugendhat [a UK
member of Parliament] outlines an idea to hold China accountable
for the misinformation around Covid-19..., demanding investigations
into China’s interference in the Hong Kong judiciary and the recent
sea/air military activity around Taiwan...”

OE Watch | June 2020

39

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s COVID-19 Information Campaign is
Backfiring in Europe
Source: “Eeas Special Report Update: Short Assessment of Narratives and Disinformation around the COVID-19/Coronavirus Pandemic
(Updated 2-22 April),” EUvsDisinfo.eu, 24 April 2020. https://euvsdisinfo.eu/eeas-special-report-update-2-22-april/
At the same time, we see continued and coordinated push by some actors, including Chinese sources, to deflect any blame for the outbreak of
the pandemic and highlighting bilateral assistance. Many reports confirm a high level of coordination between different parts of the Chinese
system in messaging and amplification of messages across different languages and communication channels, including the use of overt and
covert tactics...
Chinese officials and state media try to curtail any mentions of Wuhan as the origin of COVID-19, with new domestic restrictions on
publishing COVID-19 related research in China. Some state-controlled social media channels continue to spread the theory of the outbreak in
Wuhan being linked to US military representatives, indicating a continued intent to spread confusion about the origin of the virus.
...
There is also significant evidence of covert Chinese operations on social media. ProPublica uncovered a network on Twitter involved in a
coordinated influence campaign with ties to the Chinese government. The Daily Telegraph found Chinese state media circumventing social
media platforms’ political ad rules and buying advertising that praised China’s handling of the COVID-19/Coronavirus crisis and attacked
the US. According to the Daily Telegraph, “the ads are part of a worldwide propaganda campaign, coordinated across Facebook, Instagram,
Twitter and traditional media, attempting to depict China as a global leader in the fight against Covid-19 and drown out accusations that it
made the crisis worse by trying to cover up its own outbreak.”
Formiche has found a coordinated operation of Twitter bots in Italy amplifying messages of the Chinese embassy and attacking the EU.
Thousands of tweets with pro-China hashtags published in a two-week period in March came from bots.
...
Italian polling firm SWG finds that the share of respondents saying they considered China as friendly to Italy went up to 52 percent in March
from 10 percent in January, while the share of respondents indicating they have trust in EU institutions went down to 27 percent in March
from 42 percent in September.
Source: “UK Parliament goes from Eurosceptic to China-sceptic,” The Sunday Guardian Live, 2 May 2020. https://www.sundayguardianlive.
com/world/uk-parliament-goes-eurosceptic-china-sceptic
China is now centre stage. Instead of Eurosceptics, Parliament is now full of PRC-sceptics.
...Tom Tugendhat, MP, is actively challenging the government’s and especially the Foreign Office’s approach to relations with China. As
Chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee, on April 6, the Committee published a report entitled, “The FCO’s role in building a coalition
against COVID-19”, which is critical of the Chinese authorities’ approach to data and WHO’s procrastination. The report recommends a
science led “G20 for Public Health” and a leading role for the FCO in reforming how worldwide data is shared and verified, and to prepare
the response for a next pandemic.
Tugendhat has also set up the China Research Group (CRG), likely comprising many of the powerful ERG members. This is a collection of
MPs who seek to inform the debate on Beijing’s economic and diplomatic policies. It seems they are concerned about the transparency of
China’s strategic investments in UK, amongst other issues. Tugendhat is focusing on rethinking Britain’s engagement with China. On 27 April,
the CRG began a daily newsletter circulating their accumulation of international, political, economic news links about China. In a published
letter to First Minister Raab, Tugendhat outlines an idea to hold China accountable for the misinformation around Covid-19 that has resulted
in the pandemic, demanding investigations into China’s interference in the Hong Kong judiciary and the recent sea/air military activity
around Taiwan, and to know how UK will support Taiwan in the future. And regarding China’s military activities in the South China Sea,
Tugendhat is encouraging a G7 representation, outreach to Japan and ASEAN for security co-operation.
Source: Herman Tertsct, “Europe debates: Is China the new global threat?” New Europe, 10 April 2020. https://www.neweurope.eu/article/
europe-debates-is-china-the-new-global-threat/
The ongoing global coronavirus pandemic has had punishing global consequences with the worst supposedly yet to come. And all of this
because China not only failed to contain but refused to admit the severity of the situation.
...
Intellectual property is another area under threat from the Chinese Communist Party. There had been countless reports in the media before
the Coronavirus Epidemic of the extent to which Chinese manufacturers were going to steal the intellectual property of western clients...
OE Watch | June 2020

40

INDO-PACIFIC
Philippine Insurgents Disrupt Army’s COVID-19
Response
OE Watch Commentary: Although militants loyal to Abu
Sayyaf and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) have
often commanded the most attention among insurgents in the
Philippines, the Communist New People’s Army (NPA) is still
a highly active rebel group. The excerpted article discusses
one of the latest NPA attacks on an infantry battalion that
had been protecting employees of the Department of Social
Welfare and Development. The employees were delivering
stipends to families affected by COVID-19 during the
country’s lockdown. The NPA opened fire on the soldiers near
a village and killed two soldiers after a one-hour long gun
battle.
The article quotes the commander of the infantry battalion,
Lt. Col. Reandrew Rubio, who stated that the ambush was
particularly unfortunate because it caused violence in a
community suffering from COVID-19. The soldiers were
described as heroic for their role in assisting to alleviate
the pandemic’s effects before they lost their lives. Lt. Col.
NPA Flag.
Source: Jolle via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:NPA.png, CC BY 3.0
Reandrew Rubio vowed to avenge the two soldiers and
capture the NPA rebels who conducted the attack. With around 7,000 cases and 500 deaths in the Philippines, attacks that undermine the country’s
pandemic response will likely be heavily condemned, possibly leading to a loss of further support for the NPA. End OE Watch Commentary
(Zenn)

“Lt. Col. Reandrew Rubio, acting commanding officer of the 91st Infantry
Batallion, said the attack was ‘unfortunate,’ criticizing the rebels for bringing
violence to a community that is struggling with COVID-19.”

Source: “NPA attack on troops securing COVID-19 aid distribution kills 2 soldiers,” News Info Inquirer, 22 March 2020. https://newsinfo.
inquirer.net/1262803/npa-attack-on-troops-securing-covid-19-aid-distribution-kills-2-soldiers
Two soldiers were killed while three others were wounded in an attack on Tuesday (April 21) by gunmen believed to be New People’s Army
(NPA) rebels during the lockdown in the town of Maria Aurora. The soldiers from the Army’s 91st Infantry Battalion were securing the area
as employees of the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) were distributing cash to beneficiaries of the government’s
Social Amelioration Program. The program was part of government response to the COVID-19 pandemic and aimed at helping poor
households cope with movement restrictions during the lockdown.
According to a report of the Public Information Office of the Army’s 7th Infantry Division, NPA rebels opened fire at soldiers en route to the
village of Diaat, killing one soldier and wounding another who died later in a hospital. The soldiers returned fire and engaged rebels in an
hour-long gun battle. Lt. Col. Reandrew Rubio, acting commanding officer of the 91st IB, said the attack was “unfortunate,” criticizing the
rebels for bringing violence to a community that is struggling with COVID-19. “Sooner or later, we will catch these bandits and for sure they
will pay for the crimes they have committed,” he said.

OE Watch | June 2020

41

INDO-PACIFIC
Coronavirus Shutdown Complicates Southern Thailand
Conflict
OE Watch Commentary: The Barisan Revolusi Nasional (BRN),
meaning “National Revolutionary Front,” is an Islamist independence
movement and one of the most powerful rebel groups in northern
Malaysia and Pattani in southern Thailand. On 2 May, the Thai military
killed three BRN members in Pattani. While Thai authorities affirm
that the insurgents were preparing an attack during the Islamic holy
month of Ramadan, the operation was controversial due to various
reasons detailed in the excerpted article from Thailand’s Chiang Rai
Times.
According to the article, in April, the BRN declared that they
were ceasing all activities on humanitarian grounds because of the
coronavirus pandemic; the killings were the first act of violence since
then. Further, the article notes the attack on the insurgents occurred
just as they were breaking their fast, which was a sensitive time to
conduct an operation. Nevertheless, the Thai military claimed they
received intelligence on suspicious strangers moving into a village and
that one of the suspects had participated in an August 2016 bombing
in Thailand that killed four and injured over 30 people. The other two
suspects had also been involved in criminal and insurgent activities.

Pattani mosque.

Source: Ukwaenterprise via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pattani_mosque.jpg, CC BY SA 2.0

According to the article, the Thai military also justified its actions by noting that it was the insurgents who were initially planning to conduct
attacks, despite it being Ramadan. They further noted the soldiers involved in the operation were specifically tasked with preventing bombings
and that the ceasefire declared by the BRN was irrelevant. The BRN spokesperson nevertheless countered that the government was exploiting
the coronavirus-related shutdown to launch raids against the insurgents and that doing so was inhumane. As a result, the BRN has threatened to
resume attacks.
Amid this war of words, the article recalled that 7,000 people have died in Thailand’s Deep South since the insurgency reignited in January 2004.
Despite Ramadan and the coronavirus shutdown, the violence evidently has not abated. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“BRN spokesman Abdul Karim Khalid blamed the government for taking
advantage of the COVID-19 shutdown across the region to launch the raid on
the suspected rebel hideout.”
Source: “Security Forces Kill 3 Suspected Insurgents in Thailand’s Deep South,” Chiang Rai Times, 2 May 2020. https://www.chiangraitimes.
com/thailand-national-news/security-forces-kill-3-suspected-insurgents-in-thailands-deep-south/
Thai security forces shot and killed three suspected insurgents during a raid in Thailand’s deep south on Thursday. Authorities allege the
men were planning to mount an attack during the fasting month of Ramadan. The killings of the suspects were the first act of violence since
BRN (Barisan Revolusi Nasional, or National Revolutionary Front) rebels declared in early April that they were was ceasing “all activities”
on humanitarian grounds because of the coronavirus pandemic. But the group warned it would resume operations if Thai government forces
attacked its fighters.
The raid took place before dusk in Pakaruesong, a village in Nong Chik district, as residents of Thailand’s mainly Muslim Deep South were
preparing to break their fast at the end of the seventh day of the holy month, officials said. “Prior to the shootout, we received intelligence
that a group of insurgents took a break in the area before they planned to exploit Ramadan to launch an attack,” Maj. Gen. Piyapong
Wongchan, the chief of police in Pattani, told reporters. “As officials were circling the house and calling them out, the perpetrators opened
fire first,” Piyapong said, adding that the three men in the house were killed and one police officer was injured in the gun battle.
Piyapong said arrest warrants had been posted for all three men for their alleged involvement in several crimes. Investigators alleged that
one of the men, Yusof Mometoh, had participated in an August 2016 bombing in southern Thailand outside of the Deep South, one of several
bombings over two days that killed four and injured more than 30 people.
More than 7,000 people have died in the Deep South since the insurgency reignited in January 2004. After the BRN declared the ceasefire
on April 4, Maj. Gen. Pramote Prom-in dismissed the declaration as “irrelevant” to military efforts to curb violent activities in the southern
border region. In a YouTube posting on Thursday, BRN spokesman Abdul Karim Khalid blamed the government for taking advantage of the
COVID-19 shutdown across the region to launch the raid on the suspected rebel hideout.

OE Watch | June 2020

42

INDO-PACIFIC
The Focus of Pakistan’s 2020 Green Book
OE Watch Commentary: Pakistan’s “Green Book” is an annual publication put out by the country’s National Defense University (NDU)
with contributions from military and civilian authors on security topics of interest for the armed forces and policymakers in Pakistan. The NDU
published the 2020 Green Book in February; prompting interest from neighboring India. The accompanying excerpted article from The Print,
an English-language news website in India, provides an Indian perspective on a few of the Green Book’s essays.
The article points out how Pakistan’s Army Chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa stated that the “Balakot airstrike and the scrapping of Articles
370 and 35A by the Narendra Modi government are two significant events that will have a lasting imprint on the geopolitics of this region.” The
author mentions that the Green Book is put out “as an internal publication, which, as a matter of principle, is kept confidential from the public,”
but notes that some of it is “available on the website of Pakistan’s National Defence University.” It appears that the author is referencing the version
available online.
The article notes that other
essays in the Green Book
discuss the situation in Kashmir,
including one from retired
Lieutenant
General
Raza
Muhammad Khan, a “former
Corps Commander and former
president of National Defence
University,” who wrote that “nonstate actors will emerge again in
Kashmir” and that they “could be
unpredictable and unrestricted.”
Another piece in the Green
Book that is highlighted in the
article is one on Kashmir by a
journalist who looked at how
the Pakistani government should
conduct information warfare and
that “there should be a focused
goal of extracting authentic
information from stakeholders
in Kashmir.” She specifically
notes how “if executed properly
and a local uprising occurs
inside IOJK (Indian Occupied
Jammu and Kashmir), it will
make it extremely difficult
for India to keep selling the
terrorism card on IOJK” and that
“only a native uprising will be
just and politically defendable
for Pakistan on international
forums.”
Kashmir Region November 2019.
Overall, the article represents
Source: CIA via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kashmir_Region_November_2019.jpg, Public Domain
one of the few sources examining
the contents of the latest Green Book. It provides a look at how the situation in Kashmir continues to be an important security issue for the
government of Pakistan and how it could impact India over the next several months. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“In its latest edition... the Pakistani Army chief has
singled out the Balakot air strikes and Kashmir losing its
special status as the significant events of 2019.”
OE Watch | June 2020

43

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: The Focus of Pakistan’s 2020 Green Book
Source: Snehesh Alex Philip, “Balakot, Article 370 move changed geopolitics of region: Pakistan Army chief in ‘Green Book’,” The Print, 27
April 2020. https://theprint.in/india/balakot-article-370-move-changed-geopolitics-of-region-pakistan-army-chief-in-green-book/409585/
The Balakot airstrike and the scrapping of Articles 370 and 35A by the Narendra Modi government are two significant events that will have a
lasting imprint on the geopolitics of this region, Pakistan Army chief Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa has said in the “Green Book” of his force.
The Green Book 2020, the latest edition published by the Pakistan Army featuring essays by serving officers and others, focuses on the
implications of these events from diverse perspectives and dimensions.
The Green Book is published by the General Headquarters (GHQ) of the Pakistan Army as an internal publication, which, as a matter of
principle, is kept confidential from the public…Some of the publications are, however, available on the website of Pakistan’s National Defence
University.
In its latest edition, a copy of which was accessed by ThePrint, the Pakistani Army chief has singled out the Balakot air strikes and Kashmir
losing its special status as the significant events of 2019.
“Year 2019 witnessed two significant events which will have lasting imprint on the geopolitics of this region; first, the unwarranted Balakot
Strike by Indian Air Force on 26th February and second, the unilateral annexation of Indian Occupied Jammu & Kashmir by Mr Modi on 5th
August, through abrogation of Article 370 and 35A,” Gen Bajwa has written…
Lieutenant General Raza Muhammad Khan (retd), former Corps Commander and former president of National Defence University,
Islamabad, has in his essay said non-state actors will emerge again in Kashmir, “whose response could be unpredictable and unrestricted”.
…The non-state actors refer to terror groups created, financed and supported by the Pakistan Army and its intelligence wing — ISI.
…Farzana Shah, a Peshawar-based journalist, has called for taking the “war into non-kinetic domains” — information/cyber warfare,
electronic warfare (EW).
In her article in the Green Book, she said there should be a focused goal of extracting authentic information from stakeholders in Kashmir,
“most importantly from the general public facing the brutalities of Indian oppressive forces”.
She argued that once information is gathered, the Foreign Office must disseminate it with a proper narrative of the state of Pakistan.
“A single video clip or picture can change the perception of India, which it has built so painstakingly over the years,” Shah has written…“If
executed properly and a local uprising occurs inside IOJK, it will make it extremely difficult for India to keep selling the terrorism card
on IOJK,” Shah said. “Burhan Wani (Hizbul Mujahideen terrorist) was a local hero, India could not blame his action on Pakistan. Only a
native uprising will be just and politically defendable for Pakistan on international forums. Even such an uprising will need support in the
information domain.”
The Print had reported on 22 April that heightened terror-related activities are expected in Kashmir this summer and that a new terror
proxy has been formed by Pakistan to give an indigenous spin to it…

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | June 2020

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in Saudi Arabia and Egypt
OE Watch Commentary: Governments across the Middle
East and North Africa are relying on Chinese equipment,
technology and expertise to contain COVID-19. Of particular
note are Saudi Arabia, the Arab world’s largest economy, and
Egypt, its most populous country. Their recovery paths will
set the tone for the region’s broader post-pandemic trajectory
and China is emerging as the go-to foreign partner for both.
Saudi and Egyptian media have been largely positive
on China’s role in the pandemic. The first accompanying
excerpt, posted on the Egyptian government media website
and relying extensively on reporting from China’s Xinhua
News Agency, lists the many ways in which China and Egypt
are collaborating to combat the pandemic. The positive view
of China’s pandemic response is also prevalent – though not
universal – in Saudi media, where it is further reinforced
by media appearances and Arabic-language opinion pieces
Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation participants.
Source: President of Russia Website, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/60393, CC by 4.0
authored by Chinese diplomats, such as the accompanying
opinion piece from China’s Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, published in al-Sharq al-Awsat.
There are also material reasons for the success of the “shared fight” narrative. Egypt’s economic ties with China are on the rise, and China is
a major investor in several of President Sisi’s mega-projects. The countries are establishing joint ventures to combat COVID-19, and as of midMay, China had sent two shipments of aid to Egypt, with a third, “larger one” expected soon. In Saudi Arabia, an immediate concern at the time
of writing is whether the Hajj will proceed and what special measures will be taken if it does. A key symbol of Saudi prestige and a vital revenue
source for the city of Mecca, the Hajj begins in late July this year. In April, the Saudi government inked a $265 million deal with China’s Beijing
Genome Institute (BGI) for COVID-19 detecting equipment. The deal’s outcome will influence the fate of the 2020 Hajj and Saudi Arabia’s
economic recovery more broadly, not to mention relations between the two countries.
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and other governments across the region can be expected to rely on new technologies to implement social control measures
once COVID-19 has been contained. Building on already established relationships, China is likely to be viewed as a favorable partner in this
endeavor. The Chinese government’s political and technological know-how will further enable the growth of these relationships, especially in
Egypt, where additional Chinese capital may be necessary to finish President Sisi’s ambitious New Administrative Capital and other mega-projects
currently on hold. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“China and the Kingdom will continue to help
each other to cope with the epidemic and set an
example for a joint response to the crisis… ”
Source:
“‫ العالقات الصينية املرصية تزداد قوة ومتانة وسط مكافحة “كورونا‬:”‫شينخوا‬
“Xinhua: Chinese-Egyptian Relations Growing in Strength and Stability During the Coronavirus Fight,” Egyptian State Information Service, 20 April
2020. https://tinyurl.com/y8kj2ppt

According to the New China News Agency (Xinhua), as the entire world has fought the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) since early this year,
bilateral relations and mutual trust between China and Egypt have grown in strength and sustainability, continuing to enhance the bonds of
affection and friendship, not only at the governmental level but also at the level of civil society and between Chinese and Egyptian friends…
President Sisi expressed his confidence that the joint fight against the disease will result in strengthening friendship between the two
countries. In a message sent to his Chinese counterpart in early February, President Sisi showed Egypt’s keenness to help China in any way
possible.

OE Watch | June 2020

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: China’s COVID-19 Diplomacy in Saudi
Arabia and Egypt
Source:
‫علينا التضامن يف الرساء والرضاء لحامية أمن الصحة العاملية‬
Chen Weiqing. “We Must Stand Together, Through Good and Bad, to Protect Global Health Security,” al-Sharq al-Awsat, 23 March 2020. https://tinyurl.
com/yb8x4klx

On March 19, the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Salman bin Abdulaziz gave a televised speech. I would like to register my great
appreciation for the highly responsible measures taken by the Saudi side during the fight against the epidemic… I am fully confident that the
kingdom is now on the right path to fight the epidemic, and that the dawn of victory will finally emerge. China and the Kingdom will continue
to help each other to cope with the epidemic and set an example for a joint response to the crisis.
Source: “China gifts Egypt second batch of medical supplies against coronavirus,” al-Masry al-Youm/Egypt Independent, 12 May 2020.
https://www.egyptindependent.com/china-gifts-egypt-second-batch-of-medical-supplies-against-coronavirus/
Egypt’s Health Ministry announced on Monday that it had received a second batch of medical supplies from China to aid against the
coronavirus outbreak. Minister of Health Hala Zayed thanked China’s government and people for the gift, which reflects the close bond the
two nations share… .[Chinese Ambassador Liao] Liqiang said that the Chinese government will send a third batch of medical supplies larger
than the first and second batch.

Source: “Saudi Arabia and China sign $265m deal to fight coronavirus,” Arab News, 27 April 2020. https://www.arabnews.com/
node/1665366/saudi-arabia
“The large number of tests provided for in this agreement clearly indicates that the Kingdom is in a race against time to diagnose cases and
to work to isolate them in a way that reduces the risks from this pandemic,” said Dr. Abdullah Al-Rabeeah, chairman of the Saudi negotiating
and purchasing committee… The equipment will include the Huo Yan laboratory, a mobile modular air dome structure constructed to
support screening and detection capabilities. The inflatable lab can be transported by air as standard freight on any commercial passenger
plane. “The Huo Yan laboratory is an important step toward cooperation between our two countries in fighting against the pandemic,” the
ambassador said. Saudi Arabia has also purchased test kits and chemical reagents from the US, Switzerland and South Korea.

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence
in 1991, new regional military and security
alliances have been created (some of which are
Russian-led), new military partnerships with
non-NATO countries have been established, a
number of joint military exercises have been
conducted, over a dozen high-profile incidents
of violence and civil unrest have taken place, and
military installations have been used by foreign
militaries. While this activity gained attention, it
has not been collectively compiled. A compilation
of this activity can serve as a guide for current and
future military and security involvement in Central
Asia.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880
OE Watch | June 2020

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Domestic Drone Production in Saudi Arabia and the UAE
OE Watch Commentary: Both Saudi Arabia and the UAE
have recently restructured their domestic defense industries
to focus on producing high-value, advanced technology
platforms including UAVs. For Saudi Arabia, domestic
military manufacturing is now licensed by the General
Authority for Military Industries (GAMI), whose mandate
includes helping the kingdom achieve its goal of over 50%
of military spending being localized by 2030. GAMI has
thus far granted licenses to 25 Saudi companies, many of
them operating in new technology sectors. The Emirate of
Abu Dhabi, meanwhile, consolidated its high-tech military
production efforts into a conglomerate called EDGE, which
was established last year.
At the Unmanned Systems Exhibition (UMEX) held in
Karayel Tactical Drone.
Source: Bks5669 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kareyel.jpg, CC 4.0
Abu Dhabi last February, an EDGE company focused on
UAV technology, the Abu Dhabi Autonomous Systems Investments Company (ADASI), unveiled its “Garmousha” vertical take-off and landing
(VTOL) drone. The Garmousha is ADASI’s first 100% Emirati product and can carry twice the payload of the al-Sabr S-100, a locally manufactured
version of the Austrian Camcopter S-100 that ADASI has been producing under license for several years. The UAE Armed Forces recently signed
an agreement with ADASI for an unspecified number of Garmoushas and a new round of S-100s. To date, the UAE has lost five S-100s in the
ongoing Yemen conflict.
In Saudi Arabia, GAMI recently teamed up with a local UAV company called INTRA Defense Technologies to establish a domestic drone
manufacturing plant. INTRA, which was created in 2013 and is among the local companies licensed by GAMI, operates Turkish Karayel UAVs
on behalf of the Saudi Armed Forces. One of them was shot down in Yemen earlier this year. According to a tweet from the director of GAMI, the
new manufacturing plant will produce six UAV systems for the Saudi military by early 2021 and 40 within the next five years, presumably a Saudi
variant of the Karayel. Per the head of INTRA, “60 percent of the project’s operations will be handled by Saudi enterprises, and 60 percent of its
output will be destined for export.” Saudi Arabia’s domestic military drone program may lag slightly behind that of its neighbors in Abu Dhabi,
but its ambitions are expansive and its timeline compressed. INTRA’s strategy, according to its website, is “Technology transfer to build a modern
industry in a record period of time.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Autonomous capabilities for us is an essential part
for us to protect our troops, to protect our army and
move them away from harm’s way…”
Source: “UAE’s first locally-made drone unveiled at Umex,” The National, 23 February 2020. https://www.thenational.ae/uae/government/
uae-s-first-locally-made-drone-unveiled-at-umex-1.983259
The Garmousha, named after a kind of falcon, is “one of many” drones “coming down the line” for Edge, according to the chief executive.
However, this first one marks a significant milestone as it is equipped with the technology platform upon which all future drones — big or
small — will be designed. [Edge chief executive] Mr Al Bannai, who founded the Abu Dhabi cybersecurity contractor DarkMatter and Axiom
telecoms in the 1990s, said the platform “is flexible to accept different kinds of payloads depending on the mission,” whether for military,
surveillance or private sector operations. “We are a country that does not have a population of 100 million. Autonomous capabilities for us is
an essential part for us to protect our troops, to protect our army and move them away from harm’s way.”
Source: @GAMI_KSA, Twitter, 27 April 2020. https://twitter.com/GAMI_KSA/status/1254790585069830145
[Announcing the] launch of activities for developing, manufacturing and localizing UAV systems in coordination between the General
Authority for Military Industries and INTRA Defense Technologies, which has obtained an industrial license from the authority and aims to
launch 6 unmanned aircraft systems in 2021 and 40 systems within 5 years.
Source: “Saudi unmanned aircraft systems set for 2021 launch,” Arab News, 28 April 2020. https://www.arabnews.com/node/1666506/
business-economy
INTRA President Salman bin Nasser Al-Shathri said 60 percent of the project’s operations will be handled by Saudi enterprises, and 60
percent of its output will be destined for export.
OE Watch | June 2020

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
The Future of Turkey’s Drone Technology
OE Watch Commentary: The Turkish military operates about 130 UAVs, mostly
developed and manufactured by the Turkish defense industry. It has successfully
utilized these drones it its aerial campaigns against Kurdish groups and regime
forces in Syria as well as Kurdish militants in Iraq. These indigenous drones,
especially the Bayraktar TB2 and ANKA have proven their effectiveness in the
battlefield. Turkey has signed deals with other countries to export them as well. The
accompanying article from state-owned Anadolu Ajansı highlights further steps to
improve Turkey’s UAV capabilities in terms of “invest[ing] in smarter technologies,
heavier platforms, and more innovative” concept of operations (CONOPS).
As the article states, in terms of smarter technologies, Turkey’s Undersecretariat
for Defense Industries unveiled a project named Global Positioning System
Independent Autonomous Navigation System Development (Kerkes) in 2019 to
manufacture drones with more autonomous capabilities. Under this project, Turkey’s
defense industry intends to produce mini drones “with deep learning technologies,
autonomous navigation without relying on GPS-based systems… and smart
Bayraktar TB2 UAV, Teknofest 2019.
targeting features in complex battlegrounds.” The article states that with respect to
Source: Kingbjelica via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bayraktar_TB2_S-%C4%B0HA,_
Teknofest_2019.jpg, CC-BY-SA-4.0
developing mini drones with aforementioned advanced technological capabilities,
domestic new generation mini drones Kargu, Togan, and fixed-wing Alpagu “can offer more flexible and smarter concepts of operations as the
nation’s defense technological & industrial base (DTIB) capitalize on autonomy, deep learning, and swarming algorithms.”
While the Bayraktar TB2 and ANKA have shown their combat effectiveness with their combat payloads, three other drone systems have heavier
platforms. First, with a payload of nearly 3,000 pounds, the Akıncı (Raider) is designed and produced by Baykar Makina. Akıncı will have the
capability to carry munitions such as “the SOM-A indigenous cruise missile with a range of over 155 miles and MK-82 and MK-83 bombs.”
Second, the Aksungur will have the capability to carry out long-term surveillance, signals intelligence, and maritime patrol missions. Aksungur,
developed by the Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) has an over 1650 pound carrying capacity, an upgrade from the over 440 pound capacity of
the earlier model ANKA. Finally, with a faster platform, the Göksungur will be Turkey’s first supersonic drone.
The author states that the Syrian civil war provided opportunities to state and non-state actors to test new CONOPS. One concept that Turkish
and Russian militaries have mastered is “using unmanned aerial systems as artillery-spotters” in Syria. In fact, most recently the Turkish Armed
Forces utilized this CONOPS in its operation in Idlib by deploying the TB2 and ANKA-S drones “in collaboration with multiple-launch rocket
systems (MLRS) and howitzer.” The second CONOPS is integrating the mini drones with the larger UAVs platforms. However, the author states
that the Turkish defense industry is far from achieving this. The last concept is integrating air-to-air indigenous missiles Gökdoğan and Bozdoğan
with the Akinci drone. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“Turkey’s unmanned systems vision is investing in
smarter technologies, heavier platforms, and more
innovative… concept of operations…”
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoglu, “Turkey’s robotic warfare future in the skies,” Anadolu Ajansı, 07 May 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/analysis/
analysis-turkey-s-robotic-warfare-future-in-the-skies-/1832430#!
Ankara’s drone proliferation efforts are likely to introduce true capability leaps. Briefly, Turkey’s unmanned systems vision is investing in smarter technologies, heavier platforms, and
more innovative CONOPS (concept of operations).
Autonomy and swarming loom large as the two key words one needs to grasp for envisaging future robotic warfare. In this respect, Project Kerkes remains the leading effort of the
Undersecretariat for Defense Industries, Turkey’s main procurement body. Unveiled in 2019, the ambitious project is centered on producing mini drone swarms with deep learning
technologies, autonomous navigation without relying on GPS-based systems -- or in jammed environments --, and smart targeting features in complex battlegrounds.
Turkey’s mini loitering munitions are promising with respect to their future roles. Turkey’s new generation mini drone family, principally consisting of rotary-wing Kargu, Togan
(the latter a surveillance platform) and fixed-wing (Alpagu), can offer more flexible and smarter concepts of operations as the nation’s defense technological & industrial base (DTIB)
capitalize on autonomy, deep learning, and swarming algorithms.
Turkish defense firms, for some time, have been working hard to field heavier systems. The Turkish military’s principal unmanned aerial vehicles, Bayraktar TB-2 and Anka, have some
55kg and 200kg combat payloads respectively. Nevertheless, they carry Roketsan-manufactured small & smart solutions, such as the MAM-L, which has been a boost for their combat
effectiveness.
In the 2020s, the Turkish Armed Forces’ forthcoming platforms will offer something really different. The Akinci (Raider) deserve utmost attention in this respect. Designed and
produced by Baykar, the makers of the Bayraktar TB-2, the Akinci will enjoy a payload of 1,350kg…
The other game-changer UAS will be Aksungur, especially with respect to naval balance of power… Last, having furthered the experience harvested from the Aksungur project, TUSAS
is now working on a faster platform, the Goksungur.
The Syrian battle-space has long been a warfighting laboratory. All the belligerents, states and non-states, have learned key lessons from almost a decade of fighting. Artillery & drone
fusion is one of these lessons. Russian and Turkish militaries have digested the importance of using unmanned aerial systems as artillery-spotters…
The second notable project is the integration of Alpagu fixed-wing loitering munitions with the Akinci high-end UAS… Finally, Turkish drone proliferation roadmap involves some
exotic features too. The Akinci will carry indigenous air-to-air missiles Gokdogan and Bozdogan…

OE Watch | June 2020

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Competing Interests with Gulf Nations
OE Watch Commentary: In the early 2000s, Turkey had strong political,
economic, and military ties with several states in the Persian Gulf, which
deteriorated after the Arab Spring. The accompanying articles shed light on
Turkey’s relations with Gulf states, particularly the UAE and Saudi Arabia.
The first article delves into the evolution of Turkey’s good relations with
the Gulf states from the early 2000s until 2013 when Turkey and some of
these states found themselves supporting opposite sides of the developments
in Egypt. That year also marked the end of these countries acting as one
block. Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Bahrain formed an unofficial alliance to
have a uniformed policy, with the UAE spearheading the opposition to Turkish
policies in the Middle East. However, Turkey maintained its relations with
Kuwait, Oman and Qatar. Since the Saudi-led blockade on Qatar in June 2017,
Turkish-Qatari relations have significantly expanded with Turkey deploying
more military personnel to Qatar to counter-balance the Saudi-led blockade.

Turkish soldiers conduct patrol on outside Manbij, Syria.

Source: Voice of America via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkish_soldiers_conduct_patrol_on_outside_
Manbij,_Syria.jpg, Public Domain

According to the article, several developments changed the trajectory of Turkey’s relations with Saudi Arabia and the UAE. In 2017, when
Turkey started working with Russia and Iran to resolve the Syrian conflict, it effectively ended its cooperation with Saudi Arabia in Syria. The
UAE took this opportunity to convince Saudi Arabia to move away from Turkey. In addition, right after Turkey’s support for Qatar during the
Saudi-led blockade, Turkey immediately operationalized a planned military base in Qatar and deployed more soldiers. Turkey’s support of Qatar
further agitated Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Muhammed bin Salman (MBS) did not seem to show any interest in engaging with Turkey. Over
time, these states started countering Turkey in many theaters in the region, especially in Syria.
The article also delves into the activities of Saudi Arabia and the UAE in Syria to counter-balance Turkey’s presence there. They supported
Kurdish groups, specifically the Democratic Union Party (PYD), and its military wing the People’s Protection Units (YPG) and the Kurdish-led
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), which Turkey considers terrorist organizations. The UAE even hosted Mazloum Kobani, the commander-inchief of the SDF after Turkey issued an Interpol red notice for his arrest. Anytime Turkey launched an operation into Syria, the UAE and Saudi
Arabia condemned Turkey for violating the sovereignty of Syria, and lobbied the League of Arab States to do the same. Furthermore, after Turkey’s
operations in Syria, the UAE and Bahrain resumed their diplomatic relations with Damascus to provide support to the Syrian government. More
recently, as the second passage notes, the UAE is reported to have offered $3 billion to Damascus, to not comply with the ceasefire deal Turkey
signed with Russia to end hostilities in Idlib. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“While Saudi Arabia and the UAE are spending their political
and military energy in Syria against Turkey, they are also trying
to get the upper hand in the Libyan theater…”
Source: Dr. İsmail Akdoğan, “Körfez’in Türkiye karşıtı politikalarında yeni sahne Suriye (Syria is the new stage in Gulf policies against
Turkey),” Anadolu Ajansi, 21 April 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz/korfezin-turkiye-karsiti-politikalarinda-yeni-sahne-suriye/1812837
The United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia have moved their anti-Turkey activities to Syria with the aim of breaking Ankara’s influence. Turkey has reshaped the regional equation
through its successful military operations.
…
The level of cooperation previously achieved continued for a while in the atmosphere created by the 2011 Arab uprisings but could not survive any longer. While Turkey and the Gulf
countries initially acted in unison by supporting dissidents in Libya and Syria, they were discreetly competing in Tunisia and Egypt. The military coup in Egypt in July 2013 was a
turning point in revealing disagreements between Turkey and some Gulf countries…
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Bahrain have become countries acting together as a block in the Middle East against Turkey…The first reason for this is Turkey
starting the Astana negotiations with Russia and Iran in January 2017 to find a political solution to the Syrian conflict. Ankara’s direct talks with Moscow and Tehran meant that its
partnership with Riyadh ended in Syria… Second, Turkey’s support for its ally Qatar during the blockade that was put in place in June 2017…
The third is the change of administration in the USA in January 2017… Improving relations with Saudi Arabia to take active responsibility for controlling Iran… Fourth, in June 2017, it
was removing the Crown Prince Mohammed bin Nayif and appointing Muhammad Bin Salman (MBS) [as crown prince]…
Turkey’s cross border operations to limit the operational environment of terrorist organizations PYD/YPG naturally disappointed Saudi Arabia and the UAE who are in close
cooperation with these organizations…The anti-Turkey Gulf block… changed strategy to start a dialogue with Damascus.
…
While Saudi Arabia and the UAE are spending their political and military energy in Syria against Turkey, they are also trying to get the upper hand in the Libyan theater…

Source: “Abu Dhabi crown prince urged Assad to break ceasefire,” Anatolian Agency, 13 April 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/middle-east/
abu-dhabi-crown-prince-urged-assad-to-break-ceasefire-/1803450
Abu Dhabi’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed agreed to pay $3 billion to the Bashar al-Assad regime in Syria to break the cease-fire in the country’s northwestern province of Idlib,
according to a media report.

OE Watch | June 2020

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Involvement in Syria and Libya Stokes Regional
Rivalry
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey has recently stepped up its
involvement in Libya by dispatching unmanned aerial vehicles, military
hardware and deploying thousands of fighters from Syria. Turkey
supports the UN-recognized Tripoli-based Government of National
Accord (GNA) against General Khalifa Haftar’s Libyan National
Army (LNA). Its involvement in Libya, coupled with its operations
in Syria, have stoked regional rivalry and animosity towards Turkey.
The accompanying article provides insight into how Turkey’s actions
in these two military theaters are impacting its relations with other
regional actors.

Turkey’s Bayraktar TB2 Drone.

Source: Bayhaluk via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bayraktar_TB2_Runway.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0
According to the article, Turkey’s adversaries in Syria and Libya are
cooperating to curb its military interventions in these countries. In early March, Khalifa Haftar visited Damascus to join their efforts against
Turkey while fighting between Turkish and Syrian forces were ongoing in Idlib. This meeting paved the way for the LNA to open an embassy
in Damascus to combat “Turkish aggression in the two countries.” The author sees this as an indication that the Syrian and Libyan conflicts are
becoming intertwined (see: “Oil, Fighters, Mercenaries and Diplomats: Increasing Flows Between Libya and Syria,” OE Watch, April 2020).
While Turkey has deployed some of its proxies to Libya to fight against the forces of General Haftar, some Syrian contractors loyal to Assad
were dispatched to Libya “to fight alongside the LNA.” Both General Haftar and Assad are seeking “ways to leverage their new relations against
Turkey.” The COVID-19 global pandemic has not seemed to affect Turkey’s operations in Libya. While the dialogue between LNA and Damascus
has not been solidified as an official alliance, the article points out that it has “the potential to become a significant obstacle in the way of Ankara’s
military objectives in both countries.” The relationship between the LNA and Assad “raises the possibility of diplomatic and economic, as well as
military, cooperation down the road.”

The Libyan theater has also become a competing ground between Turkey and the UAE, which has been providing support to the LNA. While
the UAE has been providing the LNA with armed Chinese-made Wing Loong II drones to launch strikes against the GNA, Turkey has deployed
its indigenous Bayraktar TB2 drones alongside military advisors to support the Tripoli-based GNA. The UAE is not only countering Turkey’s
ambitions in Libya, but it is also supporting Turkey’s adversaries in Syria and has called on Turkey to end its hostilities in both countries. The UAE
resumed its diplomatic relations with Damascus and has provided support to Assad against Turkey’s military interventions in Syria. In addition
to the UAE, Turkey has found itself on the opposing side of the Libyan conflict with Russia as well. Russia has been sending Syrian fighters and
Russian mercenaries to Libya using the Khmeimim Air Base to deploy military hardware alongside fighters to Libya. It is unclear how long Turkey
will be able to sustain these wars, given that it has allocated most of its military resources and capabilities to these two fronts. End OE Watch
Commentary (Gündüz)

“Turkey may face additional obstacles to its military interventions
in Syria and Libya as a result of increasing cooperation between
its adversaries in these two war-torn countries.”
Source: Paul Iddon, “What cooperation between Syria’s Assad and Libya’s Haftar means for Turkey,” Ahvalnews.com, 01 May 2020. https://
ahvalnews.com/syria-libya/what-cooperation-between-syrias-assad-and-libyas-haftar-means-turkey
Turkey may face additional obstacles to its military interventions in Syria and Libya as a result of increasing cooperation between its adversaries in these two war-torn countries.
As Turkey was bombing Syrian forces in Idlib earlier this month, a delegation from General Khalifa Haftar’s Libyan National Army (LNA), which is fighting the Turkish-backed Libyan
administration in Tripoli, visited Damascus. The LNA delegation announced the opening of an embassy in the Syrian capital as part of joint efforts to combat what it called Turkish
aggression in the two countries.
…
In January, Turkey began to deploy Syrian militiamen it had previously used as proxies in Idlib to Libya to fight on the side the Government of National Accord (GNA) in Tripoli. A few
hundred Syrian contractors have also reportedly been hired from Syrian militias loyal to President Bashar al-Assad to fight alongside the LNA.
…
Cordial relations between Damascus and the Benghazi-based LNA in eastern Libya have not yet translated into any substantial military cooperation against Turkey. They do, however,
have the potential to become a significant obstacle in the way of Ankara’s military objectives in both countries.
“With advice and help from Moscow, Abu Dhabi and Cairo, it is likely that both Benghazi and Damascus will increase their cooperation against the Turkish presence in both
countries…”
Benghazi and Damascus could coordinate attacks against the Turkish military and its militia proxies in both countries to divide and stretch Turkey’s attention as well as its resources.
…
The establishment of formal representations between Damascus and the LNA raises the possibility of diplomatic and economic, as well as military, cooperation down the road…
Abu Dhabi is also a leading backer of the LNA in the Libyan conflict, supplying the group with armed Chinese-made Wing Loong II drones that have bombed Tripoli.
Ankara also sent military advisors to help the GNA repel LNA sieges of Tripoli and delivered armoured vehicles and armed Bayraktar TB2 drones to help give its ally an edge over its
Benghazi-based adversary.
…the new arrangement reached in March means that Abu Dhabi has committed itself to reward Damascus and Haftar against Turkey.

OE Watch | June 2020

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Morocco and Tunisia Drawn into Middle East Geopolitical
Competition in Libya
OE Watch Commentary: For the past five years,
the countries of North Africa have remained relatively
neutral in the competition between the UAEEgypt-Saudi Arabia axis and the Turkey-Qatar one.
Escalation in Libya and the coronavirus pandemic,
however, are creating a new strategic landscape in
which the countries of the Maghreb, particularly
Morocco and Tunisia, are being increasingly drawn
into Middle East geopolitical competition. In Tunisia,
acrimony is growing between supporters and
opponents of Turkish involvement in Libya, while
in Morocco, relations with the UAE are becoming
increasingly strained.
In late April, the Tunisian defense ministry issued
a rather stark statement denying “malicious rumors”
claiming that “foreign forces are using Tunisian
territory as a staging ground for military operations.”
The “malicious rumors” claimed that Turkish forces
Tunisian Armed Forces members wait for the President of Tunisia Kais Saied’s arrival during the Tunisia
were using a Tunisian airbase to launch drones in
Aerospace & Defense Exhibition in Djerba, Tunisia, March 4, 2020.
support of the GNA’s campaign against Khalifa Source: U.S. Army photoInternational
by Sgt. Apolonia L. Gaspar, https://www.africom.mil/media-room/photo/32647/tunisian-air-show-develops-aerospace-and-defense-partnerships, Public
Domain
Haftar’s Libyan National Army (LNA), and though
there was no supporting evidence, the claims were embraced by opponents of Turkish involvement in Libya, many of them also advocates of
deepening relations with Saudi Arabia and the UAE and/or supporters of the LNA in Libya. The excerpt from al-Quds quotes a Tunisian politician
opposed to a proposed Turkish-Tunisian investment agreement, which he views as threatening to Tunisian national sovereignty. Turkish use of
Tunisian territory to send COVID aid to the GNA in Libya and Tunisian president Kais Saied’s expressions of support for the GNA (and by
extension Turkey) are additional indicators of growing Turkish interest in Tunisia.
Moroccan-Emirati relations have been deteriorating for several years, according to the accompanying analysis from al-Araby, a Qatari-affiliated
publication. By the author’s estimation, the UAE and Morocco have been at odds since late 2017, when Morocco announced it would take a neutral
position on the Saudi-Emirati spat with Qatar. A one-time close partner of the UAE, Morocco officially suspended its participation in the SaudiEmirati Yemen campaign in early 2019. Since then, Moroccan-Emirati acrimony has gradually increased, according to the article’s author. It flared
in mid-April, after an Emirati-Israeli plan to evacuate Israeli citizens was blocked by the Moroccan government, which then accused Emiratilinked networks of spreading disinformation about its response to COVID-19. A Twitter account that purports to report from within Emirati
intelligence claimed, in early May, that the UAE had offered Morocco cheap oil and business opportunities in Libya in exchange for supporting
the LNA, but the King of Morocco had rejected the offer. Qatari-backed media outlets have, not surprisingly and likely to Emirati chagrin, been
diligent in highlighting any and all indications of Moroccan-Emirati tensions. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“These irresponsible allegations that try
to undermine Tunisia’s sovereignty and
national security are false…”

OE Watch | June 2020

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Morocco and Tunisia Drawn into Middle East
Geopolitical Competition in Libya
Source:
‫ تونس ليست منطلقا لعمليات عسكرية يف املنطقة‬:‫وزارة الدفاع الوطني‬
“Tunisia is not a Regional Military Staging Ground,” Defense Ministry of Tunisia, 28 April 2020. https://tinyurl.com/yd65belq

To inform the public on the malicious rumors circulated by some unofficial websites, which claim that foreign forces are using Tunisian
territory as a staging ground for military operations, the Ministry of National Defense confirms that these irresponsible allegations that try to
undermine Tunisia’s sovereignty and national security are false. It also confirms that Tunisia exercises absolute sovereignty over all its lands
by land, sea and air and does not allow any foreign forces to use its lands to carry out military operations.

Source:
‫تعزيز التبادل التجاري مع تركيا وقطر يثري انقساما سياسيا يف تونس‬
“Strengthening Commercial Exchange with Turkey and Qatar Causes Political Rift in Tunisia,” al-Quds, 30 April 2020. https://www.alquds.co.uk/-‫تعزيز‬
‫يث‬-‫وقطر‬-‫تركيا‬-‫مع‬-‫التجاري‬-‫التبادل‬/

Two draft laws related to commercial exchange and joint investment between Tunisia and Turkey and Qatar have created a political
controversy within the Tunisian parliament and the country’s political class. While some welcome the agreements and the support they provide
to the affected Tunisian economy, others contend that they will create dependency and target Tunisian sovereignty… Mabrouk Korchid, a
member of parliament for the Tahya Tounes party… said in a video posted to his Facebook page in regards to the two agreements: “Turkey
has an agenda of colonial settlement; its agreement violates the principles of Tunisian sovereignty.” He also called on parliamentarians to
reject this agreement because it “is harmful to Tunisia and directly allows Turkish citizens and institutions to own property in Tunisia, even
agricultural land.”

Source:
‫ الربودة والجفاء‬...‫املغرب واإلمارات‬
“Morocco and the UAE… Coldness and Estrangement,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 22 April 2019. https://www.alaraby.co.uk/opinion/2020/4/22/-‫واإلمارات‬-‫المغرب‬
-1‫والجفاء‬-‫البرودة‬

Moroccan-Emirati relations have entered a new stage, about to turn the coldness and estrangement that has been going on for more
than a year into a confrontation, after Morocco decided weeks ago to reduce its diplomatic representation on Emirati soil, by recalling its
ambassador in Abu Dhabi and the consul in Dubai. This is an unprecedented step in the history of relations between the two countries. The
strong relations and strategic partnership that put the UAE at the forefront of Arab countries investing in Morocco has turned into a chapter
from the cold war on all fronts against the kingdom’s interests. This dates to late 2017, after Rabat declared its commitment to neutrality in the
Gulf crisis and the offer by the Moroccan monarch, Mohammed VI, to play a mediating role between Doha and the four blockade countries,
in order to quell the crisis between the Gulf brothers… A few days ago, by a unilateral decision, the UAE tried to evacuate Israeli tourists
stuck in Morocco due to the coronavirus crisis, without coordination or consultation with the host country. In order to cover up its failure, it
then launched a massive electronic attack on social networks, promoting claims that the situation was unstable due to the state’s inability to
deal with the coronavirus epidemic… Regionally, the UAE worked against Morocco in the Libyan crisis, and was at the forefront of countries
that scuttled Morocco’s diplomatic efforts by obstructing the implementation of the terms of the political agreement signed in the Libyan city
of Skhirat in December 2015.

Source:
‫!امللك محمد السادس يرفض عرضا مغريا من ويل عهد أبو ظبي حول ليبيا‬
“King Mohammed VI Rejects Tempting Offer on Libya from Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi,” al-Ayam 24, 3 May 2020. https://www.alayam24.com/
articles-265138.html

A Twitter account called “without a shadow” claimed that King Mohammed VI rejected a tempting offer made by Abu Dhabi Crown Prince
Mohamed bin Zayed, in order to get him to agree to support the retired Libyan Major General, Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar. “Without a
shadow,” who identifies himself as an officer in the Emirati intelligence, said, “Mohammed bin Zayed offered the Moroccan king Libyan oil
at an attractive price and promises to establish projects for Moroccan companies. The same account added, “This will be in exchange for
Morocco’s support for Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar. The King of Morocco has completely rejected the offer.”

OE Watch | June 2020

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Debating Why Turkey is Delaying S-400 Activation
OE Watch Commentary: Turkey had initially announced that it would
activate the S-400 surface-to-air missile systems in April, but that has not
happened. The batteries were delivered to Turkey in the summer of 2019, with
the missiles following in the fall. Turkish officers who would be in charge of
operating the systems have already received their training in Russia. Turkish
analysts observe that COVID-19 could be one reason Turkey is delaying the
activation, but the Turkish President’s spokesperson stated that the deployment
would ultimately move forward. However, this announcement led to speculation
as to whether the delay is due to Turkey’s desire to avoid repercussions from
its NATO allies. The accompanying articles from Turkish and Middle Eastern
sources debate the possible reasons behind the delay.
As the first article from pro-government Hürriyet Daily News states, before
5P85PM TEL for S-400 Missile System.
CC-BY-NCthe COVID-19 global pandemic, Turkey was determined to complete setting Source: Vitaly V. Kuzmin via Vitalykuzmin.net, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/April-22th-Alabino/i-Vc8kzJd/A,
ND-4.0
up S-400 missile systems and make them operational, despite the strain it would cause to its relationship with Western allies. Turkish officials
repeatedly stated that “it was a done deal.” However, the author notes that this was in a pre-COVID-19 world. Now, in light of the potential
economic and political changes to the global world order, Turkey may be more reluctant to do so. The country was already facing acute economic
problems and COVID-19 has exacerbated its economic decline. It might be hoping to generate cash flow to mitigate the economic impact of
COVID-19 from its Western allies. In this case, politics is very much intertwined with the economy for Turkey, given the risk of devastating
sanctions from the United States if it activates the S-400.
The second article from Al-Monitor, a news site with analysts from the Middle East, states that “even though the coronavirus pandemic is cited
as the reason, the decision is utterly political” given that Turkey has not disrupted any of its other military operations. The author provides four
factors that have forced Turkey to delay the activation of the S-400s. First, Turkey’s economy is worsening and Ankara is hoping for a currency
swap with the Federal Reserve to mitigate the declining economy. The second factor is the need to balance Russia and Iran in Syria by remaining
“in the good graces” of its NATO allies. Turkey has risked face-off with Russia and Iran over the situation in Idlib, so it desperately needs to
refrain from further straining its relations with its NATO allies. Another factor might be the Turkish President’s personal relationship with the US
President who “made it clear that activation was a redline for Washington, and he could no longer defend Ankara if the systems were activated.”
Finally, domestic politics may be playing a role: “Activating the S-400s at present risks triggering public pressure… to move the systems to the
Syrian border to protect Turkish troops” deployed to Idlib, which might spark a new crisis with Russia. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)
Source: Serkan Demirtas, “Delaying S-400s: A short-term or long-term move by Turkey?” Hürriyet Daily News, 29 April 2020. https://www.
hurriyetdailynews.com/opinion/serkan-demirtas/delaying-s-400s-a-short-term-or-long-term-move-by-turkey-154285
…according to sources, presidential spokesman İbrahim Kalın admitted that the activation of the S-400 systems will be postponed due to COVID-19 at an online meeting with the
members of the European Council of Foreign Relations (ECFR) in mid-April. Second, a story run by Reuters, quoting an anonymous senior Turkish official, who suggested Turkey will
postpone the activation due to the coronavirus has never been denied by Ankara.
The official underlined that there is “no going back on the decision to activate the S-400s…”
A Turkish decision to purchase, deploy and activate the S-400 systems from Russia has long been at the core of Turkey’s strained relationship with the United States and the Western
partners at NATO. Despite sanctions and threats from its allies, Turkey has always underlined that “it was a done deal” and there would be no step back from the procurement of the
Russian system.
… Many analysts and experts predict that the pandemic will have drastic impacts on the world order both in terms of politics and economy and Turkey’s decision to delay the activation
of the Russian systems would be very much related to this fact.
On top of the concerns is the economy.
The second concern stems from the fact that the activation of the systems will leave no room for maneuvering for U.S. President Donald Trump who has been using his power to waive
the sanctions against Turkey through the Countering America’s Adversaries through Sanctions Act (CAATSA)…
The third is about the future setting of the world order. Many analysts predict that the post-pandemic world will likely observe a new Cold War, pitting the U.S. against China with
substantial impacts on the global security balance as well as trade and economy…
The question is now whether this is a short-term or long-term postponement?

Source: Metin Gürcan, “Turkey’s S-400 delay is about more than just the economy and COVID-19,” Al-monitor, 23 April 2020. https://www.
al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2020/04/turkey-russia-usa-s400-delay-is-more-than-economy-covid19.html
…the S-400s remain unpacked at Murted Airfield Command. The way Ankara chose to disclose the “delay” was a low-key statement to Reuters. “There is no going back on the decision
to activate the S-400s, [but] due to COVID-19 … the plan for them to be ready in April will be delayed,”…
Obviously, the reason for Ankara’s decision to delay the activation of the S-400 regiment, made up of four batteries worth $2.5 billion, is not technical. And even though the coronavirus
pandemic is cited as the reason, the decision is utterly political. Tellingly, the pandemic has not disrupted any Turkish military operations either at home or in Syria and Iraq. It has had
no impact in military terms that requires postponing the activation of the systems.
The delay is driven by at least three other factors: namely, Ankara’s shifting geostrategic orientation in Syria in a bid to balance Iran and Russia, and its need to remain in the good
graces of US President Donald Trump, its sole ally in Washington, and manage public perceptions at home.
In Syria, Turkey’s face-off with its partners Russia and Iran in Idlib in February showed how Turkish and American interests have become more aligned in the Syrian war.
Another factor has to do with the personal relationship between Erdogan and Trump… “When Trump hosted Erdogan… He made it clear that activation was a redline for Washington…
…Activating the S-400s at present risks triggering public pressure led by the opposition to move the systems to the Syrian border to protect the Turkish troops in Idlib.

OE Watch | June 2020

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Weaponizing Water in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying articles from Kurdish
sources discuss the water situation in northern Syria, how and why water
is being “weaponized” and the impact of this on locals. As the first article
explains, the Alouk Water Station in the Syrian city of Ras al-Ayn (or
Serêkaniyê in Kurdish) is a major potable water supply for a large swath
of northern Syria including al-Hasakah, Til Timir, al-Howl camp and alArishah camp. The article reports that after Turkish and Turkish-backed
forces took over control of this water station in October 2019, Turkishbacked armed groups have cut off water six times, to nearly half a million
residents, putting their health at risk during the current global pandemic.
Some have referred to this as the “weaponization of water.” The status of
the health care system in the region is already dire because of the ongoing
conflict.
According to Kurdistan 24, a news network broadcasting from the Iraqi
Tabqa Dam.
Source: Modified by Dr. Blofeld via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tabqa_Dam.png, CC-BY-3.0
Kurdistan Region, there are several reasons why Turkish-backed armed
groups have cut off the water. First, these groups have used water as a means to apply political pressure on the self-declared Kurdish-led autonomous
administration in northern Syria. Second, as a result of Russian mediation, “in exchange for securing water flow,” the Kurdish-led autonomous
administration has committed to provide “electricity to the Turkish-occupied areas.” These armed groups cut off water to demand a supply of
“higher levels of power.” The Energy Directorate of the autonomous administration accused Turkey of reducing water from its dams which
impacts the energy output of the self-declared autonomous Kurdish administration in Syria.
The second article from Hawar News, a news site closely monitoring developments in Syria, states that the water directorate of the autonomous
administration has been searching for an alternative water supply to the Alouk water station, as the lack of water could jeopardize their readiness
to combat COVID-19. The article quotes Sozdar Ehmed, a co-director of the Hasakah water directorate, saying that they have reached out to
Turkish officials through Russia, but talks have not yielded any results. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

Source: Wladimir van Wilgenburg, “Turkey, for sixth time, cuts water supply to 460,000 civilians in north Syria” Kurdistan24.net, 07 May
2020. https://www.kurdistan24.net/en/news/8a40cc0c-f0bc-4429-8618-e8820338e6a6
For the sixth time since October, Turkish-backed armed groups on Wednesday cut the flow from the Alouk reservoir that supplies water to areas in
northeastern Syria’s Hasakah province that are controlled by the Kurdish-led local government, depriving some 460,000 civilians in the region of the
essential resource.
The local Hawar News Agency reported that workers had not entered the Alouk water station for ten days and the reason for the action was not
immediately clear.
…
“It was then restored, only to be cut off three times in February and March as a means of applying political pressure on the AANES (Autonomous
Administration of North and East of Syria), and cut off again by Turkish shelling of the waterpipe at the end of March.”
…
The Alouk water station is near the border town of Ras al-Ain (Serekaniye), which Turkey and its militant proxies took over in October during Turkey’s
so-called Peace Spring Operation.
Under Russian mediation, though, Kurdish-led authorities in northeastern Syria have been providing electricity to the Turkish-occupied areas in
exchange for water flow, but Turkish-backed groups have continued to repeatedly cut off water, demanding higher levels of power.
Furthermore, the Energy Directorate of the Autonomous administration in Hasakah on Monday accused Turkey of reducing water flow from Turkish
dams, which limited the number of hours of electricity in northeastern Syria coming from dams under administration control.

Source: “Gerînendetiya Avê dest bi projeya alternatîfa stasyona Elokê kir (The Water Authority has launched an alternative project to Alouk
station),” Hawar News, 24 March 2020. http://www.hawarnews.com/kr/haber/gernendetiya-av-dest-bi-projeya-alternatfa-stasyona-elokkir-h29709.html
Hasakah Water Directorate Co-Chair Sozdar Ehmed announced that they are looking for alternative water resources and stated that despite efforts, the
Alouk water station has not resumed operations after it was taken out of service by the Turkish military and its gangs.
…
Sozdar stated that negotiations were held with the Turkish state through Russia. Sozdar noted that no results could be obtained from the negotiations
and the public still does not have water. She said Turkish state officials deceived Russian officials, “The officials said that the station employees will be
allowed to enter the station during the talks but the employees were later not allowed.”

OE Watch | June 2020

54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Improves its UAV Technology
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s Armed Forces and Ministry
of Defense recently showcased a series of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV) to the public. On 20 April, Tasnim News
Agency, linked to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC), posted a report and video of the UAVs in use, as shown
in the first accompanying source. They also unveiled an air-toair missile that can be affixed to the Ababil-3 UAV. According
to the report, the missile uses a thermal image seeker as its
guiding system, similar to the “Spike” missile.
Khabar Online, another Iranian-state news source, detailed a
series of UAVs and their specifications. The latest production is
the Atlas UAV, which is reportedly an improved version of the
Ababil-3. Some of the latest improvements to the Atlas include
a new landing gear design. The report explains that the front
landing gear uses hydraulic technology and the rear wheels
Khabar Online.
have undergone changes to improve the drone’s taxi ride on Source: Khabar Online, https://www.khabaronline.ir/news/1379562/‫هنومن‬-‫یناریا‬-‫داپهپ‬-‫ما‬-‫ویک‬-‫ما‬-۱%DB%B0۷-‫اکیرمآ‬-‫ار‬-‫دیسانشب‬-‫شترا‬-‫زهجم‬
the runway. In the fuselage, the drone is equipped with tiers to
carry bombs, pylons under its wings so that it can carry vertical series bombs, and an “auto take-off land” system, in which take-off and landing
operations are done automatically. The Atlas also has a laser sensor under the fuselage to use with the automatic landing and take-off system. The
report also noted the Jet Naseh UAV, which is a series of drones produced by the Qods Ministry of Defense Industries. The Jet Naseh has a turbo
jet engine and is reportedly modeled after the U.S. MQM 107 UAV.
The Iranian government has had a UAV development program for years, with these activities representing a continuation of their ongoing efforts.
The reverse engineering of foreign UAV technologies and designs by the Iranian program is a common occurrence. Iranian UAVs have been
provided to Hizballah in Lebanon, Shia militias in Iraq and Syria, and Houthi rebels in Yemen to support their proxy activities and for field combat
testing of the Iranian systems. Typically the provision of these systems is limited to less advanced UAV designs but Hizballah has, at times, been
provided with more advanced models. End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

“During the presentation of these drones, they
released a video of them in use and firing missiles.
Some of the drones have air-to-air missiles with solid
fuel rocket engine and wings that can be opened from
inside the body in the style of anti-tank missiles.”

Iranian UAV Launching A Missile.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1399/02/01/2247479/‫شازگ‬-‫مینست‬-‫زا‬-‫کشوم‬-‫دیدج‬-‫هرزدض‬-‫ناریا‬-‫زیهجت‬-‫یاهداپهپ‬-‫یناریا‬-‫هب‬-‫کشوم‬-‫یاه‬-‫هتفرشیپ‬-‫پات‬-‫کتا‬-‫ملیف‬

OE Watch | June 2020

55

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Iran Improves its UAV Technology
Source: “Nemoneh Irani pahpad MQM 107 Amrika-e ra beshnaseed/Artesh mojehez beh een 4 pahpad tehjmeh shod + ax (See the Iranian
copy of the U.S. MQM 107 UAV – Army equipped with 4 aggressive UAVs + photos),” Khabar Online, 19 April 2020. https://www.
khabaronline.ir/news/1379562/‫هنومن‬-‫یناریا‬-‫داپهپ‬-‫ما‬-‫ویک‬-‫ما‬-۱%DB%B0۷-‫اکیرمآ‬-‫ار‬-‫دیسانشب‬-‫شترا‬-‫زهجم‬
Atlas UAV
The drone, which is actually an optimized version of the Ababil 3 drone, was a new drone that was delivered to the Army Air Force. The
main structure of this drone is similar to Ababil 3, but changes have been made in some parameters of this drone. The first change that can be
seen is the different design of the UAV’s landing gear compared to Ababil 3.
The UAV’s front landing gear uses hydraulic technology, and its rear-wheel drive vehicles have undergone changes to improve the drone’s
taxi ride on the runway.
In the fuselage, the drone is equipped with bomb-laying pylons under its wings so that it can carry vertical series bombs. Therefore, the
structure of the atlas body is strengthened.
The Atlas is also equipped with a laser sensor under the fuselage to use the automatic landing and take-off system, which helps the drone
detect the exact location of the landing runway.
Jet Naseh UAV
Jet Naseh is modeled after the U.S. MQM 107 and has a flight duration of less than an hour, speed of Mach 0.7, and recovered by a
parachute. The jet engine is the Tolo 4 mini-jet engine.

Tasnim News Agency.

Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://www.tasnimnews.com/fa/news/1399/01/30/2245982/‫لیوحت‬-‫یهد‬-‫هوبنا‬-‫یاهامیپاوه‬-‫تج‬-‫نودب‬-‫نیشنرس‬-‫یمزر‬-‫ییاسانش‬-‫و‬-‫فده‬-‫هب‬-‫شترا‬/photo/1

OE Watch | June 2020

56

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Khamenei Orders Investigation into Naval Accident
OE Watch Commentary: During military exercises in the Gulf of Oman
on 10 May, an errant missile fired from an Iranian navy ship struck the
Iranian supply ship Konarak, killing 19 sailors. Video showed the ship still
burning as it was towed into Chahbahar.
That Ayatollah Ali Khamenei would send both a message of condolence
and order an investigation, as excerpted here is logical. According to the
Islamic Republic’s constitution, the Supreme Leader, after all, is not only the
political and religious leader of Iran but also the commander-in-chief both
of the regular Iranian military and the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps
(IRGC).
The Konarak is one of 12 Hendijan-class ships. Built in the Netherlands, it
has been in service for over 30 years. It is armed with 20 millimeter-caliber
cannons and four anti-ship cruise missile launchers. Iran generally uses
Hendijian-class ships for naval surveillance, reconnaissance, mine-laying,
and drone-launching.
Both the Konarak and the ship that allegedly launched the missile were Photographs of those killed in the 10 May 2020 friendly fire incident onboard the
Iranian naval support vessel Konarak in the Sea of Oman.
Source: Islamic Republic News Agency, https://img9.irna.ir/d/r2/2020/05/11/4/157119107.jpg
part of the regular Islamic Republic of Iran Navy (IRIN) as opposed to the
IRGC Navy. Unmentioned in Khamenei’s remarks is that this is the third major Iranian Navy accident in recent years. In 2018, for example, the
Damavand destroyer hit a breakwater while docking and sank in the Caspian Sea port of Bandar Anzali, killing three sailors (see: “Iran: Warship
Sinks after Mishap,” OE Watch, March 2018). In 2016, after publicly declaring their intention to sail into the Atlantic, an Iranian flotilla was forced
into port in Durban, South Africa, for emergency repairs that lasted several months, during which sailors had to beg for food in the streets.
The Konarak incident is the second major accident under the watch of Hossein Khanzadi who took over the leadership of the IRIN in November
2017. While the IRGC is generally the more elite force within the broader Iranian military, there is a more distinct division of responsibility within
the navy in which the IRGC has primacy in the Persian Gulf, shares responsibility in the Strait of Hormuz, and the IRIN is dominant as a means of
projecting power in the northern Indian Ocean and beyond. As such, this mishap coming so soon after others suggests that the IRIN is increasingly
unable to meet the demands that Iranian strategists put upon it. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The martyrdom of Navy sailors was very painful for me.”
Source: “Peyam-e Taslit-e Rahbar-e Enghelab dar pey Shahadat-e Jame’e az Daryadelat Niru-ye Darya-ye Artesh dar Hadiseh Shanavar
Konarak (Message of Condolence from the Leader of the Revolution after the Mass Martyrdom of the Navy Sailors onboard the Konarak),”
Khamenei.ir, 12 May 2020. http://farsi.khamenei.ir/message-content?id=45596
Message of Condolence
His Excellency, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, sent a message of condolence to Seyyed Abdolrahim
Mousavi, commander of the Islamic Republic of Iran Army, regarding the mass martyrdom of navy sailors in the grievous accident on the
Konarak, and he asked God Almighty to provide patience and comfort to the families of the grieving families and healing to the victims of this
accident.
The text of the message of the Supreme Leader of the Islamic Revolution is as follows:
In the Name of God, the compassionate, the merciful:
Major General Mousavi, commander of the Army of the Islamic Republic of Iran:
The painful incident for the Konarak vessel, which resulted in the martyrdom of a number of Navy sailors, was very painful and sorrowing
for me. Although, those hardworking sailors who lost their lives in doing their difficult and honorable duty will be compensated, God willing,
with divine reward. However, the pain of losing loved ones for their families, and the loss of these sincere, hardworking youth for the naval
forces is immense and difficult to bear.
I give my condolences to their grieving families, and I ask God to grant them patience and calm. Furthermore, I ask God to heal those who
have been injured. I ask the officials in charge to investigate this incident thoroughly to identify those who are potentially at fault, and take all
necessary measures to prevent such damaging, tragic incidents from happening again.
OE Watch | June 2020

57

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Prosecute Cybercriminals
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted letter from a collection of clerical
leaders which appear on Gerdab.ir, an Iranian website dedicated to news about
cyberspace and cyber strategy, discusses increasing frustration among clergy
in Qom with the continued penetration of the Internet into Iranian society. The
leaders wrote to the head of the judiciary “asking the judiciary to prosecute the
perpetrators of the disaster of cyber vulgarity and crime.”
For more than a decade, the Iranian government has talked about creating a
national intranet (see: “Iran: Comprehensive Legal System for the Country’s
Internet and Cyberspace,” OE Watch, October 2017). Recent unrest has sparked
greater concern, especially with regard to the potential for young Iranians to use
social media and phone apps to organize civil unrest (see: “Telegram Giving Data
to US and Israel,” OE Watch, March 2018). The Iranian military has discussed a
greater role in constructing the national intranet (see: “Iran: Armed Forces Ready
to Take Over Internet,” OE Watch, October 2019) and Mohammad-Javad Azari
Jahromi, Iran’s minister of Information and Communications Technology, has
claimed progress (see: “Iran: Progress on National Intranet,” OE Watch, July 2019).

An Internet Café on Vanak Square, Tehran.

Source:Hamshahrionline.ir https://images.hamshahrionline.ir/images/2018/5/18-5-12-181717page02.jpg

That seminary leaders in Qom—among the most conservative elements in the Islamic Republic’s political spectrum—would complain about
the Internet does not surprise. What is significant is their castigation of both Jahromi and the Supreme Cyberspace Council for dereliction of
duty. Politics may be involved in both cases: Jahromi, at 38-years old the youngest minister in Iran’s cabinet, is widely discussed as a potential
presidential contender. More interesting is the criticism of the Supreme Cyberspace Council because Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei appoints its
members.
That the letter is addressed to Ebrahim Raisi is significant as he is not only the head of the Judiciary, but one of the top contenders to replace the
81-year-old Khamenei upon his death. The letter’s signatories may therefore be urging Raisi to make control over the Internet a wedge issue and
push Iran in a more conservative direction.
The letter continues not only to condemn Telegram and Instagram specifically—accusing Instagram in particular of twisting young people’s
minds, but also says that independent social media poses a security threat and alleges that the Islamic State terrorists who attacked the Iranian
parliament (June 2017), the shrine of Imam Khomeini (June 2017), and the military parade in Ahvaz (September 2018) had all used Iranian social
media unhampered, a charge which seems unlikely but which would still put Jahromi and incumbent politicians on the defensive. End OE Watch
Commentary (Rubin)

“Authorities have an obligation to remove
the enemy from cyberspace.”
Source: “Amalat-e Valangari Fezayi Mojazi Keshavar ra Mohakameh Konid (Prosecute Cybercriminals),” Gerdab.ir, 30 April 2020. https://
gerdab.ir/fa/news/29459
Prosecute Cybercriminals
According to Gardab, the Assembly of Representatives of Students and Scholars of the Seminary of Qom, the Coordinating Council of Cultural Centers
of the Seminaries and more than 400 professors, students and scholars of seminaries from 65 cities across the country wrote a letter to the head of the
judiciary asking the judiciary to prosecute the perpetrators of the disaster of cyber vulgarity and crime.
The text of this letter is as follows:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful:
In the presence of Ayatollah Raisi, the esteemed head of the Judiciary, may he be blessed with greetings and congratulations on the occasion of the
arrival of the blessed month of Ramadan and the spring when the Quran was revealed, Imam Khamenei at the beginning of his speech marking the
beginning of the [Persian] year, introduced cyberspace as one of the areas in which it is vital to find strength. Obviously, fulfilling this important task is
the responsibility of the responsible institutions and, of course, this is not the first time that His Holiness has made this request to the authorities.
The lack of regulation of cyberspace, a large part of which is in the hands of the enemy, has allowed it to become a slaughterhouse for teenagers and
young people and the enemy is striking at the country, and so authorities have an obligation to remove the enemy from cyberspace.
He also compared the vulnerability in cyberspace with chemical weapons, and said,
Today, television, radio, the Internet, social networks, all kinds of cyberspace devices are being used against our public opinion. The communications
sector has a responsibility to pay attention to this part of the country. We have also mentioned these in face-to-face meetings in which we emphasize that
now we say they should pay attention so that they do not become a tool for the enemy to use like they once did with chemical weapons against the people!
They must know their duty and take it seriously….
Unfortunately, His Holiness’s outspoken grievances against the Ministry of Communications and the Supreme Council of Cyberspace at the General
Assembly also failed to oblige these institutions to perform their legal duties….

OE Watch | June 2020

58

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran Talking to the Taliban
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic of Iran’s
relationship with the Taliban has long existed in the shadows,
while Iran’s official enmity toward the Taliban is public and
dates from the August 1998 Taliban massacre of Iranian
diplomats and intelligence officers stationed at the Iranian
consulate in Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan. That incident
nearly led to war between Iran and the Taliban in 1999. That
enmity was one of the reasons why Iran cooperated with
the broader international coalition in ousting the Taliban
and supporting the Bonn process which culminated in a
new, post-Taliban Afghan government in 2002.
As US influence grew in Afghanistan, however, Iranian
military officials responded by re-establishing ties to the
Taliban including allowing Taliban commanders to utilize
Iranian banks and the smuggling of Iranian weaponry to
the Taliban. Esmail Qaani who assumed leadership of the
Qods Force, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps’ elite
external operations group, upon Qassem Soleimani’s death
in January 2020, was in charge of Qods Force operations in
Afghanistan including Iranian ties with the Taliban until then.

The Taliban Office in Doha, Qatar.
Source: Ana.ir, https://ana.ir/fa/news/33/31802

The excerpted report from Iran’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs brings Iran-Taliban ties into the open. While the United States and its NATO
efforts to advance a peace process with the Taliban is discussed in Western press, the Iranian government is undertaking its own efforts to
establish diplomatic rather than simply intelligence and military ties. That Mohammad Ebrahim Taherian, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad
Zarif’s special envoy, is both speaking to the Taliban representation in Doha, Qatar, and meeting with senior Afghan officials in Kabul suggests
that Tehran may also be seeking to play a mediating role, not in concert with that of the United States and its Resolute Support partners. End OE
Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The two sides exchanged views on international negotiations.”

Source: “Tamas Teliphoni Namiyandeh-e Vizheh-e Vazir-e Amor-e Kharjeh-e Kashavarman ba Moghamat Daftar-e Siyasi Taliban dar Qatar
(Phone Call of the Special Representative of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Our Country to the Political Office of the Taliban in Qatar),”
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 6 May 2020. https://mfa.gov.ir/portal/newsview/594140/
Phone Call of the Foreign Minister’s Special Envoy to the Taliban
Mohammed Ebrahim Taherian, special representative of our Minister of Foreign Affairs, examined current developments in Afghanistan
in a telephone conversation with officials of the Taliban political office in Qatar…. During the telephone conversation, the two sides also
exchanged views on future developments in international negotiations and comprehensive efforts to prevent the widespread spread of the
coronavirus in Afghanistan…
Mr. Taherian has traveled to Kabul in recent weeks to meet with the country’s leaders, including Mohammad Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah
Abdullah, to present the Islamic Republic of Iran’s positions and proposals for resolving the current political problems in the country, and our
country’s readiness to provide comprehensive assistance.

OE Watch | June 2020

59

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Threat of Coronavirus Complicates Yemen Ceasefire
Discussions
OE Watch Commentary: Unlike surrounding neighbors in the
Middle East, Yemen and its people have so far been spared from
the spread of coronavirus. However, the threat of the pandemic is
already having an impact on the country’s political and military
situation by complicating discussions over a new ceasefire in the
country’s long-running war between Houthi rebels in the north
and the Saudi-backed Yemeni government in the south. Writing
for the Saudi-owned al-Majalla, political commentator and analyst
Ahmad Salim highlights the ways a lack of trust between both sides
of the conflict has hampered attempts to implement a temporary
truce--one partly aimed at creating space to deal with the threat
of the coronavirus pandemic. Salim highlights the accusation by
Houthi Minister of Health, Taha al-Mutawakkal, that, “if a single
person is afflicted with coronavirus in Yemen it will be the fault of
both the United Nations and the Saudi-led Arab coalition.”
However, Salim accuses the Houthi leadership of exploiting the
Saudi Arabian soldier from the First Airborne Brigade with a UAE soldier, 2016.
Source: Saudi88hawk via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saudi_Arabian_soldier_from_the_First_Airborne_Brigade_with_a_UAE_
soldier,_2016.jpg, CC by 4.0
threat of coronavirus to force a ceasefire that is less about dealing
with coronavirus and more aimed at recouping from recent battlefield losses suffered by Houthi insurgents. Indeed, Salim notes that the Houthis
recently broke a previous ceasefire implemented by the Saudi-backed coalition and continued to launch drone strikes against the coalition even as
they themselves called on the international community to implement another ceasefire. And, at the time of Ahmad Salim’s article, Yemen had yet
to see its first official case of coronavirus. This, Salim argues, suggests that the Houthis’ call for a coronavirus ceasefire is just one in a pattern of
instances where the group’s leadership has used ceasefires and truces to rearm and regroup--never to work towards a more lasting peace. If the
coronavirus pandemic does spread to Yemen, the political distrust between the two sides of the conflict is likely to further weaken the country’s
ability to respond. End OE Watch Commentary (Dennis)

“The pandemic is a gift to the Houthis who are
constantly seeking an excuse to reorganize and plan new
attacks against the Saudi-led coalition that is supporting
the legitimate Yemeni government. To date, there is no
documented case of the coronavirus in Yemen.”
Source: Ahmad Salim, “‫( يعرشلا فلاحتلا مامأ مهرئاسخ فيزن فاقيإل »انوروك« ـب نوعّرذتي نويثوحلا‬Blaming Coronavirus, Houthis Seek
Ceasefire in an Attempt to Stem Losses Inflicted by Saudi-backed Coalition),” al-Majalla, 10 April 2020. https://arb.majalla.com/node/85241/
‫نويثوحلا‬-‫نوعّرذتي‬-‫ـب‬-«‫»انوروك‬-‫فاقيإل‬-‫فيزن‬-‫مهرئاسخ‬-‫مامأ‬-‫فلاحتلا‬-‫يعرشلا‬
“Every time there is a crisis, or the Houthi militias suffer yet another loss, we hear their leaders plead with the international community to
implement a ceasefire between them and the international coalition headed by Saudi Arabia. We have seen this again as Muhammad Ali alHouthi--a member of the so-called Supreme Political Council--called on the United Nations Security Council to intervene and halt the war
that the legitimate, Saudi-supported Yemeni government is currently waging against Houthi insurgent groups. Yet those same Houthi groups
continue to launch attacks targeting civilians and Yemeni Army formations.
This comes at a time when the Saudi and Emirati-formed coalition has already announced an all-encompassing ceasefire in Yemen that will
last two weeks with the option to extend. The ceasefire went into effect on April 9th, 2020.
Coalition leadership stated that the purpose of the ceasefire was to lay the groundwork to invite United Nations special envoy, Martin
Griffiths, to Yemen in order to mediate meetings between the legitimate Yemeni government and the Houthis. Colonel Turki al-Maliki,
spokesperson for coalition forces, said that this was an opportunity to coalesce and unite efforts to arrive at a permanent and lasting
ceasefire in Yemen and to, “come to an agreement on direct, tangible, and significant steps to decrease suffering by the Yemeni people.”
Houthi militias never let crises go to waste; they continually use them as a pretext for ceasefires and truces that allow them to regroup and
recover from battlefield losses. The spread of the coronavirus pandemic throughout the world is their most recent excuse for calling for a stop
to the war--a war in which they are suffering heavy losses of both men and ammunition from battles around both Sirwah and Qaniyah.”
OE Watch | June 2020

60

AFRICA
Boko Haram’s Strategic Initiatives to Increase Funding
OE Watch Commentary: Before Boko Haram
insurgents appeared in the Lake Chad region, farming of
red pepper and commercial fishing were major economic
activities. However, as the accompanying excerpted article
from Nigeria’s Premium Times points out, their arrival
destroyed the production and trade of both. Then, in 2015,
with Boko Haram’s leadership pledging allegiance to the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the terrorist group,
now rebranded as the Islamic State’s West Africa Province
(ISWAP), encouraged a resurgence of fishing and farming
among the local communities. In this way ISWAP was
eventually able to control the production and trade sectors
of both.
It should be noted that a split occurred in ISWAP,
resulting in two separate groups with one still called
ISWAP. However, each is also often referred to as Boko
Haram.
ISWAP’s strategic economic moves resulted in two
major benefits. First, with an abundance of fish in the lake
(because there had not been significant fishing there for several years), ISWAP could claim that the fishermen’s large catches were a sign of “Allah
being pleased with the war” the insurgents were waging, providing propaganda to recruit new fighters. Second, ISWAP made and continues to
make large sums of money from the farming and fishing enterprises through levies they impose. This money, as the article notes, fuels ISWAP’s
activities in northeast Nigeria.
Chadian soldier at target practice.

Source: SGT Derek Hamilton/AFRICOM/Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Marksmanship_training_in_Chad_during_Flintlock_2017_170306-A-KH850-007.jpg,
Public Domain

Many of the locals who were living in squalid IDP camps were quite anxious to return to their fishing and farming activities even though it was
the insurgents that had initially driven them away. Now they could resume their previous work and make a living. Additionally, ISWAP provided
security, basic medical care, and even arbitration services, enabling the terrorist organization to improve its image.
It is difficult to assess how much military actions have damaged ISWAP’s operations. Overall it appears Nigerian forces have tended to do
relatively little to interrupt ISWAP’s economic activities. The article describes the Nigerian military actions in Nigeria as “tokenism” that focuses
on seizing fish from traders that was on its way to market. Recent activity by the Chadian military in Chad, however, has reportedly been
significantly more disruptive, and maybe even permanently ended ISWAP’s economic activities in that area. Thus, Chad appears to be trying to
end the relationship between ISWAP and Chadian farmers and fishermen, whereas in Nigeria and Niger, according to sources, it is business as
usual. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The new conditions of the lake served ISWAP in two ways:
cobbling together an economy under its control and creating a
strong basis for recruiting new fighters into its fold.”
Source: Ahmad Salkida, “How Boko Haram Sustain Operations Through International Trade in Smoked Fish,” Premium Times (Nigeria), 26
April 2020. https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/389916-how-boko-haram-sustain-operations-through-international-trade-insmoked-fish.html
Because the structures of both the production and trade had collapsed, the ISWAP leadership sent emissaries to various camps of the
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Borno State requesting them to return to their farms, fishing and trading under their watch, HumAngle
was told.
The individuals and households in IDPs camps who heeded the call of ISWAP seem not taken in by any of the views. “It was difficult to
choose between hunger where there is safety such as in an IDPs camp and the abundance of food, where life can end any minute,” said
Adamu Baga, who just fled the Island in April to Diffa in Niger Republic.
But in 2015 the insurgents took strategic steps to control and re-order trade in both products. They encouraged local fishing among the
communities by the banks of the lake and created a new regime of levies and secure routes for fish traders to reach designated markets.
The new conditions of the lake served ISWAP in two ways: cobbling together an economy under its control and creating a strong basis for
recruiting new fighters into its fold. They described the renewed aquatic life in the lake as a strong pointer that Allah had been pleased with
the war they had been waging and was rewarding them on the instant with this symbolic manna from heaven.
OE Watch | June 2020

61

AFRICA
Communications to Counter Extremism in the Lake Chad
Basin

OE Watch Commentary: Communicating a government’s
messages to rural populations, especially to those susceptible to
extremism, that show a country’s leaders are concerned with improving
people’s lives, is deemed a critical aspect of programs to prevent
radicalization. However, as the accompanying excerpted article and
study from the South African Institute for Security Studies notes,
finding the proper message as well as medium can be quite difficult.
Several obstacles exist to effective government communications in
rural areas, including poor telecommunications infrastructure, such
as a lack of relay towers; low availability of credit, thus hindering
the ability of people to purchase cell phones; high levels of illiteracy
making printed material essentially irrelevant; as well as language
and cultural barriers.

The Lake Chad Basin.

Source: Aymatth2 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chad_River_Basin_relief.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0

The accompanying article focuses mainly on the countries that
span the Lake Chad Basin as well as Côte d’Ivoire in looking not only
at the problems of government communications in rural areas but also
potential solutions. One of the most important factors regarding that
messaging is that a government needs to emphasize what it is doing
with regards to poverty and unemployment, as those are two of the
biggest factors that are believed to drive people to embrace extremism.
However, if the people hear the message but don’t understand it, the
effort is futile, and thus translators must be utilized when appropriate
to ensure all local people not only have access to a message but also
comprehend it.

Because of the lack of communications infrastructure, including cell towers and cell phones, in the Lake Chad Basin, innovative ways must be
found to convey the government’s messages. Theater groups presenting plays promoting respect among different ethnic groups – an important
message where a great deal of the conflict is ethnic related - is one method to disseminate information. Another is to have former militants openly
discuss the disillusionment that drove them to defect from an extremist group.
Being cognizant of the roles gender and culture play in communications is also critical. For example, women in many societies do not sit among
men during public discussions, and thus having a woman speak to other women is often a preferred method of communication. As for men, the
study associated with the article found they would have a difficult time sharing their emotions in public, and thus messaging delivered via radio
or television, where available, would be better for them. However, when people are impoverished, the extremist narrative can be compelling
regardless of gender. It is up to the government to provide an effective counter-narrative that reaches the people in a way they can comprehend.
End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Communications strategies play a vital role in
violence prevention and peace building initiatives.”
Source: Isel van Zyl, “Preventing Violent Extremism: The Role of Communications,” Institute for Security Studies (South Africa), 31 March
2020. https://issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/pb-138.pdf
Communications strategies play a vital role in violence prevention and peace building initiatives. The term ‘communications strategies’
covers a variety of activities including messaging campaigns, theatre shows, dialogues, group discussions and preaching by religious leaders.
Poverty and unemployment are believed by the respondents in the study to be the biggest drivers of violent extremism in the Lake Chad Basin
and Côte d’Ivoire.
Challenges persist regarding the development of relevant indicators that measure the outcomes of communications strategies.
The lack of capacity to develop relevant content and the dearth of knowledge regarding the best medium to use remain significant challenges
for local civil society organizations (CSOs).

OE Watch | June 2020

62

AFRICA
Somalia: Ethiopia’s Influence Rises as Kenya Prepares to
Leave AMISOM
OE Watch Commentary: Kenya, which is part of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), is looking to withdraw its forces from
Somalia by 2021. Meanwhile, as the accompanying excerpted article from
the South African website The Conversation notes, Ethiopia, also a member
of AMISOM, is seeing its influence rise in the war-torn country.
Kenya’s initial foray into Somalia was in 2011 in an act-of self-defense
(according to Kenya) with the reported objectives of stopping al-Shabaab
from launching cross-border attacks and improving Somalia’s internal
security. The following year it convinced Ethiopia to join in the fight, and
the combined forces redeployed under AMISOM. While AMISOM can
point to several significant successes over the years, including greatly
weakening al-Shabaab’s ability to hold Somali cities, it has not been able
to entirely eliminate the terrorist organization’s threat to the fragile Somali
government. Additionally, al-Shabaab has launched three major attacks on
A Kenyan gunner assigned to AMISOM.
Kenyan soil (on the Westgate Mall in 2013, on Garissa University in 2015, Source: AMISOM/Wikimedia/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AMISOM_Kismayo_Advance_13_(8049969190).jpg,
Public
Domain
and on the Dusit Hotel Complex in 2019). In conjunction with numerous
smaller attacks, many in Kenya are anxious for their armed forces to leave Somalia so as not to further antagonize al-Shabaab.
Should Kenya actually follow through with its withdrawal, there will be several adverse consequences. One is that it will mean a loss of influence
in Somalia, thus providing Ethiopia with the opportunity to fill that void. While the two countries fought together in Somalia, more recently
tensions have arisen between the two. Ethiopian forces have been supportive of the Somali government, including targeting opposition members.
This use of force is particularly worrisome in Jubaland, a southern region of Somalia that Kenya has been trying to develop as a buffer zone against
al-Shabaab, but over which the Somali government wants to exert increasing control. However, Jubaland’s leader is a Kenyan ally, and Kenya does
not want him replaced.
There are other consequences if Kenya withdraws from Somalia, including the view of its allies that it cannot be trusted to stay a difficult course.
Still, the article notes, even if Kenya does withdraw from AMISOM, it will probably eventually be able to repair its relationship with Ethiopia with
regards to regional policies, though that will likely be on Ethiopia’s terms. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“It has become clear that [Somali President] Farmajo is willing to
draw Ethiopian forces as well as the Somali National Army into his
quest to consolidate power by appointing political allies. This has
pitched Ethiopia against Kenya, and created tension.”
Source: Stig Jarle Hansen, “What Kenya stands to lose and gain by withdrawing from Somalia,” The Conversation (South Africa), 1 May
2020. https://theconversation.com/what-kenya-stands-to-lose-and-gain-by-withdrawing-from-somalia-133640
Kenya has achieved a lot since it intervened in 2011. Its intervention was a “game changer”, contributing to a momentum that led to alShabaab losing all major Somali cities. But it has fallen short of its goals to subdue al-Shabaab and end terrorism in Kenya. And it will leave
a Somalia where its rivals are gaining power and challenging Kenyan national interests.
It has become clear that Farmajo is willing to draw Ethiopian forces as well as the Somali National Army into his quest to consolidate power
by appointing political allies. This has pitched Ethiopia against Kenya, and created tension. Ethiopian forces have recently intervened in
support of the Somali government in Mogadishu, targeting the enemies of the Farmajo government. That government has been increasingly
willing to use military force against the opposition (as well as the Somali media, and against the regional state of Jubaland, led by Kenyan ally
Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”.
The government of Somalia’s president, known as Farmajo, has increasingly been at odds with Kenya. The two countries are currently in a
diplomatic row over their shared maritime border.

OE Watch | June 2020

63

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab in Somalia Turns to Criminal Activities in
Kenya for Funding
OE Watch Commentary: With the loss of a sizable amount
of land in Somalia, and with infighting between two of its
leaders over finances, al-Shabaab is increasingly turning to
Kenya to help raise the funds necessary to keep the terrorist
organization going. As the accompanying excerpted article
from Kenya’s Daily Nation explains, the group’s main activities
related to this financial endeavor are extortion, illegal taxation,
and robbery. The crimes are reportedly committed by Kenyans
who were recruited by Somalis, trained in Somalia, and then
sent back to Kenya to carry out their illegal activities.
Without that infighting between the two al-Shabaab leaders,
the terrorist organization would not have become so reliant
on criminal activities in Kenya to fund their various terrorist
attacks in Somalia. The dispute between al-Shabaab’s leader,
Ahmed Diriye, and its head of finance, Mahad Karate,
has turned bloody, and can be explained, in part, by ethnic
tensions. Karate, who is supported by his Habagedir clansmen,
Al-Shababb hostages rescued in Kismayi, 30 May 2014.
refuses to share money with Diriye, who is mainly supported Source: AMISOM via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2014_05_30_AL_SHABAAB_HOSTAGES_RESCUED_IN_KISMAYU-6_(14310093525).jpg,
Public Domain
by the Rahawein. Diriye, unable to pay his troops, has initiated
a purge against Karate’s followers. In return, Karate is purportedly planning an attack on Diriye’s supporters. Meanwhile, those Somali terrorists
who lack pay are teaming up with Kenyan al-Shabaab supporters to prey upon Kenyans living near the Somali border.
Kenyan police note that these extortionists can be quite violent, with some extortion techniques involving the placement of IED’s. Those who
refuse to give in to the extortion demands have been assassinated, which not only silences the dissenter’s voice but instills fear in others who might
have considered resisting. The end result has been that large sums of money from Kenya continue to flow to al-Shabaab in Somalia even while it
struggles with internal conflict. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Local Al-Shabaab terrorists are leading a vicious
extortion ring for the Somali-based terror organization
within Kenyan borders…”

Source: Nyambega Gisesa, “Shabaab crafts new ways to replenish funds,” Daily Nation (Kenya), 26 April 2020. https://www.nation.co.ke/
news/Shabaab-crafts-new-ways-to-replenish-funds-/1056-5534812-o20563/index.html
Local Al-Shabaab terrorists are leading a vicious extortion ring for the Somali-based terror organisation within Kenyan borders, a security
report seen by the Sunday Nation indicates.
The Kenyans were recruited by the group and trained in Somalia before being deployed in the northern counties of Wajir, Mandera and
Garissa to lead in the extortion of locals through which they fund Al-Shabaab activities across the border in Somalia.
Some of the Kenyans named in the report spearheading the extortion rackets, and who are wanted by the police, include Maalim Yusuf
Hassan Abdullahi, Abdirashid Ibrahim, aka Osman Noor, Ahmed Dabar, Issack Okolla and Mohamed Bilal Olow. These men are believed to
be operating in Garissa, Mandera and Wajir counties.

OE Watch | June 2020

64

AFRICA
Al-Shabaab Kidnaps Professionals to Utilize Their Skills
OE Watch Commentary: While terrorist groups are
notorious for kidnapping individuals to demand high
ransoms, al-Shabaab uses this tactic in other ways as
well. As the accompanying excerpted article from the
Kenyan news site Daily Nation reports, in the past year,
al-Shabaab abducted 11 professionals in northern Kenya
and took them to Somalia to utilize their skills. According
to a senior Kenyan security officer, the Somali-based
group is particularly interested in medical professionals
and teachers, though the latest victim was a mechanic.
Al-Shabaab also appears interested in abducting
security personnel. In January, they raided a Kenyan
village, forcing five captors onto a pickup truck that was
then driven towards Somalia. They eventually abandoned
four of their detainees but continued on with a Mr.
Mohamed Salat, who reportedly could divulge security
information that would be of interest to the terrorists.
Ransom requests are not totally out of the picture
when professionals are kidnapped. When two Cuban
Al-Shabaab fighters.
physicians were abducted in April (resulting in the
Source: Tasnim News Agency, https://www.tasnimnews.com/en/news/2016/10/30/1226232/al-shabaab-terrorists-seize-town-from-somali-government, CC BY 4.0
killing of a police officer escorting the doctors), elders
attempted to negotiate for their release. Unfortunately, they returned empty handed as al-Shabaab had set too steep a ransom for an agreement to
be reached.
One result of these abductions is that prominent Kenyans living near the border have relocated elsewhere, out of concern of being the next victim.
Their fear is compounded by Kenyan police not having permission to cross the border to look for them should they be kidnapped. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“Somalia-based militant group Al-Shabaab has
ramped up kidnappings as a way of beefing up its pool
of professionals and gathering intelligence.”

Source: Manase Otsialo, “Kenya: Al-Shabaab Steps Up Kidnap of Experts to Aid Agenda,” All Africa/Daily Nation (Kenya), 12 April 2020.
https://allafrica.com/stories/202004130160.html
Somalia-based militant group Al-Shabaab has ramped up kidnappings as a way of beefing up its pool of professionals and gathering
intelligence.
According to the officer, Shabaab targets mostly non-locals, who are believed to be cooperative once under its control.
“Nobody is sitting pretty at home along the border. Al-Shabaab will come for you hoping to get information or just to cause pain to your
family,” he said.
“Our work as police ends at the border ... I am not in a position to account for the fate of the Cuban doctors, but we have a team working on
it,” [Inspector-General of Police]Mr Mutyambai said.

OE Watch | June 2020

65

AFRICA
The Impact of COVID-19 on African Security
OE Watch Commentary: The African Union’s
“Silencing the Guns by 2020” initiative was supposed
to end major conflicts on the continent. However, as the
accompanying excerpted article from The East African
claims, this ambitious plan is being derailed in part by
the coronavirus pandemic. Not only did the pandemic
disrupt plans to help bring peace to troubled areas, it has
actually increased the likelihood that some conflicts will
be exacerbated, particularly in already fragile areas. The
article notes, “the regions expected to be most affected are
the Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin, Central African region,
eastern Congo, the Horn of Africa, Sudan, South Sudan
and Libya.”
The harm caused by the disease, especially in regions
already experiencing conflict, is significantly related to
the economic disruption it causes. Conflict often occurs
over scarce resources and in areas with low employment.
Thus, with experts reporting that the pandemic leads to
AMISOM and Somali National Army in a military operation.
increased food scarcity and diminishing employment Source: AMISOM/Wikimedia/Flickr, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AMISOM_%26_Somali_National_Army_operation_to_capture_Afgoye_Corridor_Day_4_23_
(7319789764).jpg, Public Domain
opportunities, the conditions that often lead to conflict are
aggravated. Meanwhile, crisis management systems in place meant to deal with the factors leading to conflict are being sorely tested.
The African Union is studying ways to mitigate the impact of the disease, especially in fragile states with large numbers of restless, unemployed
youths. The hope is to at least prevent the loss of gains that were made so far under the “Silencing the Guns by 2020” initiative. End OE Watch
Commentary (Feldman)

“The pandemic is exposing weaknesses in governance,
as youth unemployment and restlessness rises in
already fragile countries.”

Source: Fred Oluoch, “Pandemic Disrupts Plan to End Wars,” The East African, 11 May 2020. https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/africa/
Pandemic-disrupts-plan-to-end-wars/4552902-5547210-12ee93uz/index.html
The pandemic is exposing weaknesses in governance, as youth unemployment and restlessness rises in already fragile countries.
“Silencing the Guns”, the continental programme to end civil wars in Africa by the end of this year, has been disrupted by the coronavirus
pandemic.
Experts said that acute food scarcity, increased gender-based and sexual violence, diminishing economic opportunities, which has led to lost
livelihoods as a result of the pandemic, were more severe in countries with ongoing conflict....
“Covid-19 will do more harm in regions experiencing conflicts. We must deal with security in the wake of the pandemic,” said Andrews Atta
Asamoah, a senior research fellow with the Institute of Security Studies.
The regions expected to be most affected are the Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin, Central African region, eastern Congo, the Horn of Africa,
Sudan, South Sudan and Libya.

OE Watch | June 2020

66

AFRICA
Mali Struggles to Fight Pandemic
OE Watch Commentary: On 10 May, Mali President Kéita addressed the
nation in regards to the COVID-19 pandemic. The state of the union-like speech
was long overdue, according to a lengthy treatise by Bamako-based Center for
Research, Political, Economic and Social Analysis (CRAPES), published in the
Mali Tribune and then Malijet news outlets. In it, the authors admonished the
government to take the opportunity of the pandemic crisis to build a better Mali.
As the excerpted passages demonstrate, underlying the call for better
governance, the piece is loaded with statistics that reveal why Mali will be hardpressed to do anything substantial to make the country a better place in the face
of the virus that forced the country’s borders to close on 18 March. It is notable,
perhaps obvious, that the problems mentioned are the same broken foundations
that the country has been teetering upon even before the current health crisis.
War in the north, an anemic economy, food insecurity, and Internally Displaced
Peoples (IDPs) have threatened to take down the current government.

Pre-pandemic Bustling Bamako Airport.
Source: Photo by Dodge Billingsley

International organizations estimate 4.3 million people in Mali will require humanitarian assistance in 2020 and over one million with suffer
severe food insecurity during the rainy or lean season from June to August this year. There were over 200,000 IDPs as of December 2019, mostly
refugees moving from the north and central regions into the capital and further south. Currently there are many refugee camps in the capital that,
in effect self govern, and are cramped and overcrowded with no access to the medical safeguards needed to reduce infections and flatten the curve.
The lucky ones have been able to circumvent the refugee camps and enter into fragile alliances in many villages across the south, often on a
trial-like basis. The village of Bassa south of the capital is emblematic of several villages in the area, which have taken in refugees. Ten families,
about 100 people, have settled in the village with the permission of the village chief and his council. The newcomers signed a contract with the
village stating they will abide by the laws of the village and be governed by the local leadership. So far, according to both the refugees and a village
spokesman, there have been no issues, but the newcomers arrive with very little or nothing, putting increasing pressure on the local food supply
until they can effectively grow and harvest their way out of starvation.
These are taking place against the backdrop of additional statistics from the publication. The authors claim with reasonable data that as much as
70% of the economic activity of the state, more than 60% of gross domestic product, and 95% of all jobs created, are part of the informal economy,
the bulk of which will be difficult to shut down because the general population is simply too poor to have any other option than to work.
For some, their businesses and livelihood disappeared when the government closed all borders and commercial flights in and out of the country
on 18 March. The Bamako Airport, normally thriving with drivers, porters, money changers and many others is a snapshot of the 70% of the
country that feeds and clothes itself via the informal economy. Those professions have been completely wiped out for the time being.
To keep Mali from slipping into an economic abyss, the government will implement massive state intervention. Nationwide health initiatives like
the “One Malian, One Mask” program which will distribute 20 million washable masks are being undertaken. Restrictive measures have been put
in place to keep those with means from hoarding and stockpiling essentials that could lead to or exacerbate shortages of necessary staples.
These conditions do not suggest that Mali deserves any special attention. As the authors state, “COVID-19 spares no high, middle or low income
countries.” It is also difficult to say that the pandemic will cause the government to collapse or turn the country to anarchy. However, Mali is
already a sick and fragile nation. It ranks as one of the worst economic countries on the African continent. It is more likely that the pandemic
will only exacerbate these conditions rather than create the conditions for a renewal that the authors hope for. End OE Watch Commentary
(Billingsley)

“The restrictive measures presented as one of the most

effective solutions to slow down the chain of transmission
without accompanying measures, understood and shared
by economists, are a chimera in Mali: between the risk of
catching COVID-19 and survival, the choice is quickly made.
Hence the need for state intervention.”

OE Watch | June 2020

67

AFRICA
Continued: Mali Struggles to Fight Pandemic

Roadside market south of the capital highlights the informal nature of the businesses that produce a substantial amount of Mali’s GDP.
Source: Photo by Dodge Billingsley

Source: “Economie: La résilience du Mali à l’épreuve de la crise du Covid-19 (The Economy: Mali’s Resilience to the test of the Covid-19
Crisis),” Center for Research, Political, Economic and Social Analysis and published by Mali Tribune and MaliJet, 12 May 2020. https://
malijet.com/actualite_economique_du_mali/242871-economie-la-résilience-du-mali-à-l’épreuve-de-la-crise-du-covid-.html
The President, in his speech insists on the “reorientation of certain budgetary allocations starting at the top of the State” to cope with this
expense. This poses a real concern in terms of strategy of opportunity cost in a country where everything is a priority (health, education,
security, etc.). The reorientation strategy should therefore be carried out with a view to improving collective well-being rather than for the
benefit of a privileged few in the Republic. For example, the payment of teachers’ salary arrears even by strikes could, beyond easing this
social front, be seen as a fairer and more equitable measure for the benefit of people of all social strata. And no matter, the discourse on the
rationalization of the state budget has always been made by the same authorities, but by examining only governance over the period 20132018, spending has suffered an average increase of more than 13%, … the overall situation of the country is only getting worse.
Going beyond skepticism about the sustainable and effective nature of these measures, a big difficulty arises as to their sufficiency. This
crisis, beyond its cyclical aspect, poses, in the most obvious way, another more thorny structural problem. Indeed, our health services are in
a terrible situation, even in the abyss. Nursing staff, in addition to their limited number, suffer from a shortage of necessary skills. There is
limited or even non-existent care materials in some hospitals. Now is the time to think about and design a large-scale investment plan for the
health sector, ranging from training, through recruitment, construction of hospitals to the availability of equipment. This is why the current
crisis becomes an opportunity for Mali to straighten its governance, to raise its head for the well-being of the populations.

OE Watch | June 2020

68

AFRICA
The EU Suspends Training Mission in Mali due to
COVID-19
OE Watch Commentary: According to the excerpted article
from the Spanish news source La Razon, the European Union (EU)
training mission in Mali has decided to suspend its mission after one
of the Spanish soldiers tested positive for COVID-19, out of concern
the virus could become widespread. While that soldier was placed
in isolation and received medical attention, the situation shows how
COVID-19 is affecting EU military support efforts overseas.
The EU mission’s Public Information Office affirmed that the
decision was “temporary and necessary” and was a precautionary
measure. There is no intention to permanently end the training
mission given that there is no end in sight to the war in Mali and the
EU maintains an interest in stabilizing the country. Nevertheless,
when the mission will recommence is unclear. The article notes that
the mission had implemented measures to reduce the possibility for
contagion in coordination with the Malian Armed Forces and World
Health Organization advice, but this was not sufficient to prevent
the initial infection of the Spanish soldier. As a result of the virus,
the EU has also reoriented its mission toward addressing the health
and hygiene of its personnel and partners, particularly Malian
soldiers, including taking their temperatures daily. End OE Watch
Commentary (Zenn)

Logo of European Union Training Mission, Mali.

Source: European Union, vector works by TUBS via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:EUTM_Mali.svg, Public domain

“This decision is ‘temporary and necessary’ and is taken as a
precautionary measure with the aim of protecting both operational
personnel, the Malian Armed Forces and the local population.”

Source: “La UE suspende su misión de entrenamiento en Mali, en la que hay 300 militares españoles (The EU suspends its training
mission in Mali, in which there are 300 Spanish soldiers),” La Razon, 8 April 2020. https://www.larazon.es/espana/20200408/
jkqkmgirpzg43ksorzwuh3dil4.html
The European Union made the decision to suspend the activities of its training mission in Mali (EUTM MALI) after one of the members of the
international contingent tested positive for coronavirus. This pausing of activities implies that the nearly 300 Spanish soldiers who participate
in the training of Malian soldiers had to suspend their activities. As explained by the mission’s Public Information Office in a statement, this
decision is ‘temporary and necessary’ and is taken as a precautionary measure with the aim of protecting both operational personnel, the
Malian Armed Forces and the local population.
For the EU, the only priority now in this operation is the health of its personnel and partners, and stressing that all of the military comply
with hygiene measures and take their temperatures daily. Currently, the Spanish contingent deployed in Mali is made up of about 300 troops
and most are in the “Boubacar Sada Sy” Training Center in the town of Koulikoro, about 60 kilometers from Bamako. They are scheduled to
return to Spain in mid-May, when they will have to be relieved.

OE Watch | June 2020

69

AFRICA
Chad Considers Withdrawing from Regional Military
Cooperation
OE Watch Commentary: In late March, Chadian
president Idriss Déby announced the launch of
a military campaign against Boko Haram after
the group killed 92 Chadian soldiers on Chadian
territory. However, according to the excerpted
passage, on 10 April, Déby abruptly announced that
the campaign was over. Furthermore, he expressed
resentment that no other country had helped Chad in
its counter-Boko Haram campaign and thus asserted
that Chad would no longer send its forces to other
countries to participate in military operations.
The article notes that Déby’s statement came amid
plans for Chad to send a battalion to the Niger-MaliBurkina tri-border area to combat Islamic State
in Greater Sahara (ISGS) fighters. Nevertheless,
the author suspects that Déby may still send that
battalion and his statement may be bluster. One
Chadian Army pick-up in Diffa.
Source: Idriss Fall (VOA) via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chadian_Army_pick-up_in_Diffa.jpg, Public Domain
reason why Déby may feel under pressure to end
foreign operations, however, according to the article, is that he is coming under criticism domestically for not protecting Chad enough, which
resulted in the unprecedented Boko Haram attack in March. This may also explain why the article noted that Chad reported killing 1,000 Boko
Haram members, although that was most certainly an overestimate.
Déby also promised never to allow Boko Haram to occupy “a single centimeter” of Chadian territory again. The article also indicates that Déby
expects Nigeria and Niger to increase the intensity of their operations and reoccupy all of Boko Haram’s territories on their sides of Lake Chad
once Chad’s campaign halts. Considering the widespread scope of the Boko Haram insurgency however, this is a tall order. (Also see: “Chad’s
President to Lead Military Operations against Boko Haram,” OE Watch, May 2020) End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“We fought alone, on the borders of Lake Chad
without the contribution of the countries which
are supposed to help us.”

Source: “Déby: ‘aucun soldat ne participera à une opération militaire en dehors du Tchad’ (Déby: ‘no soldier will take part in a military
operation outside of Chad’),” Alwihda Info, 10 April 2020. https://www.alwihdainfo.com/Deby-aucun-soldat-ne-participera-a-une-operationmilitaire-en-dehors-du-Tchad_a85623.html
“As of today, no Chadian soldier will participate in a military operation outside of Chad. We are capable of defending our territorial
integrity,” the head of state said Thursday in remarks reported by the Presidency. He made the statement during a meeting at the Lake with
the military leaders who led Operation Anger in Boma, before returning to N’Djamena. “We fought alone, on the borders of Lake Chad
without the contribution of the countries which are supposed to help us. The Chadian soldiers died for the cause of the member countries of
the LCBC and the Sahel,” said Idriss Déby, specifying that his mission to the Lake has “come to an end”. However, it has not been specified
whether the deployment of a Chadian battalion in the tri-border area (Niger-Mali-Burkina Faso), initially planned for the end of March,
would be definitively compromised. France had asked for Chad’s support to restore calm in this area.
The deadline for neighboring countries Niger and Nigeria is until April 24 to reoccupy their liberated territories. After this time, Chad will
leave these areas to return to secure only its territorial boundaries. In eight days of military operations, the Chadian army has neutralized
more than 1,000 terrorists, across five areas of operations.

OE Watch | June 2020

70

AFRICA
Mozambican Civilians Unprotected from Insurgent
Attacks
OE Watch Commentary: Mozambique has become one of the hotbeds
of insurgents loyal to the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). The
excerpted Portuguese article from a Mozambican news source documents
how civilians are struggling as a result of the insurgency. In particular, the
article suggests that Mozambique’s armed forces have been too apathetic,
resulting in a series of insurgent attacks on villages in the north of the
country.
According to the article, villagers were forced to sleep in the bush
after an attack that led to the torching of houses and a Catholic church.
Insurgents also robbed banks and stole food from people. The villagers
reported that the insurgents shouted that Islam was the only religion and
that Christian villagers should become Muslim. They also occupied the
local government building for a period of the time. This indicated an
ideological element to the attack beyond the insurgents’ affiliation to ISIS
itself.
Civilians are in dispair and believe that Mozambique’s military has
been too slow to defend their villages. One villager asks where the
military is and implies that because of the natural resources in northern
Mozambique, the government cares not about civilians but only about
wealth. In total, the article reports that seven villages were attacked,
but it was not clear how many people were killed or injured. Unless
Mozambican armed forces improve their preparedness to combat the
ISIS-loyal insurgents and demonstrate their commitment to protecting
civilians’ lives and property, the article gives little reason to expect a
reversal in the course of violence afflicting the north of the country. End
OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Msumbiji Cabo Delgado.

Source:Kipala via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Msumbiji_Cabo_Delgado.PNG, Public Domain

“The people of that village are still hiding in the woods
because of these terrorists who have been causing terror and
panic in Cabo Delgado since October 2017.”
Source: “BA’s desfilam em Muidumbi, queimam igreja católica e destroem bens públicos (BA’s parade in Muidumbi, burn Catholic church
and destroy public goods).” Moz 24 Horas, 13 April 2020, https://www.moz24h.co.mz/post/ba-s-desfilam-em-muidumbi-queimam-igrejacat%C3%B3lica-e-destroem-bens-p%C3%BAblicos
The escalation of attacks on villages and district headquarters by the armed bandits has intensified in Cabo Delgado due to the apathy of the
armed defense and security forces. In the past four days, “malefactors,” according to the new police lexicon, have attacked seven villages in
the district of Muidumbi, including government assets. A particular case was in the village of Muambula, where the Nangololomas Mission is
located, which was totally destroyed by them. The people of that village are still hiding in the woods because of these terrorists who have been
causing terror and panic in Cabo Delgado since October 2017, with the exception of the missionaries’ houses, which have not been invaded or
touched, and some peoples’ houses that have also escaped destruction, although the most of Muambula was destroyed, including the Catholic
church that was burned, and the banks and other goods that were inside the church. They ransacked people’s goods and food, insulted the
name of Christ by shouting that Islam is the only religion and it is necessary that everyone follow it.
It is unclear how many people were killed and injured in this latest attack in Muidumbi. “We are in the woods, afraid to go out, they want
to force us to be Muslims, but we Makondes are Christians, we eat and like pork. Where is our government now? We are in bad shape, we
believe we were sold on account of wealth in the province,” said the source who finds herself a refugee in the bush.

OE Watch | June 2020

71

AFRICA
Affiliates of Al-Qaeda and ISIS Start Clashing in the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: The two main jihadist groups in the Sahel are
the Islamic State in Greater Sahara (ISGS) and Jamaat Nusrat al-Islam wal
Muslimin (JNIM). Since their respective formations in 2015 and 2017, they
have generally avoided clashing, even though the former is aligned with the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and the latter is affiliated with ISIS’s rival,
al-Qaeda. However, according to the excerpted article, this started changing in
mid-April, when the two groups began clashing in an area along the MaliBurkina Faso border called Gourma.
The article asserts that an ISGS attack on JNIM on 14 April led to casualties
on both sides. ISGS subsequently attacked Fulani civilians in the same area
who were suspected of being related to or supporters of the JNIM fighters.
The article also places this development in global context, noting that the Sahel
had been the only region in the world where ISIS and al-Qaeda operated near
each other but did not clash. According to the article, this latest development
is resulting in increased deaths for both groups and civilians. These clashes
further demonstrate how the al-Qaeda-ISIS rift has progressively become more
severe all over the world. If there were any prospects for ISIS and al-Qaeda to
collaborate, then the Sahel was the region where it could occur. Nevertheless,
the article makes clear that clashes between the groups will become the norm
while they both also fight national and French security forces at the same time.
End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The Sahel was until this the only area
in the world where the branches of alQaeda and the Islamic State organization
coexisted without problem, but in recent
months this situation has changed.”

Main market of Fada N’Gourma; city in South-East Burkina Faso (West Africa).

Source: Martin Wegmann Baliola via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fada_N_Gourma.JPG CC BY SA 3.0

Source: “Mali-Burkina: Plusieurs Morts dans des Affrontements entre Djihadistes dans le Gourma (Mali-Burkina: Several Dead in Clashes
between Jihadists in Gourma),” Nord Sud Journal, 15 April 2020. https://www.nordsudjournal.com/mali-burkina-plusieurs-morts-dans-desaffrontements-entre-djihadistes-dans-le-gourma/
During the night of Monday April 13 to Tuesday April 14, fighters from the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) organization, led by
the Nigerien jihadist leader, Moussa Moumouni, attacked a position of the fighters of Jamaat Nusrat al-Islam wal Muslimin (JNIM) of Jafar
Dicko, affiliated with al-Qaeda in the forest of the locality of Tin Tabakat, near the Mali-Burkina Faso border.
Jafar Dicko’s men repelled the attack, but according to our sources, there were many deaths on both sides. The same sources say that angry
ISGS fighters killed several civilians in attacks on Fulani villages in the Tin Tabakat area that they suspected are connected to JNIM fighters
of Jafar Dicko.
The Sahel was until this the only area in the world where the branches of al-Qaeda and the Islamic State organization coexisted without
problems, but in recent months this situation has changed. Fighting between jihadist groups is now regular, particularly in Mali, and results
in many deaths.

OE Watch | June 2020

72

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia Warfare Update
OE Watch Commentary: With the coronavirus pandemic and global
oil glut as unusual factors and the continuing deterioration of living
conditions in neighboring Venezuela as a now usual factor, the irregular
war in Colombia has taken a few odd turns. As evidenced by the first
accompanying reference, the finance structure of the National Liberation
Army (ELN) is being stressed by the secondary effects of the pandemic, this
along with operations being mounted by the Colombian Army against that
guerrilla organization. According to the reportage, the army dismantled
three clandestine oil refineries belonging to the ELN in Catatumbo,
a region spanning some of northeastern Colombia and northwestern
Venezuela, and which has long been a center of armed conflict. Producing
precursor chemicals for cocaine paste processing, such refineries are
not unheard of, but an increased scale of such operations seems related
to difficulties in obtaining refined products (including even gasoline)
from Venezuelan sources. Meanwhile, as noted in the second reference,
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) insurgents.
members of the government security forces are occasionally taken hostage Source: Institute forRevolutionary
National Strategic Studies (INSS) via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Revolutionary_Armed_
Forces_of_Colombia_(FARC)_insurgents.GIF, Public Domain
by local indigenous groups as a form of protest. Tribal groups, mostly in the
southwestern part of Colombia, will take a soldier or policemen captive, to later let them go after some embarrassing treatment. The practice has
been tolerated for some time and now a retired officers’ association is trying to bring the issue back to light. The third and fourth references are
representative of reportage about recent government operations, also in Cauca Department, against FARC dissidents and units of the ELN. The
government reports are claiming some success. The joint government operations, as is often the case, occurred in zones where outlaw groups
engage in intramural combat over the control of smuggling routes. In worse news for the Colombian Army, however, several officers were cashiered
because of what is reported in the fifth reference to have been the irregular use of intelligence assets (surveillance) by an army unit against some
news media. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“... [On] 1 May, in Caloto [county], Cauca Department... the
Public Force was taken hostage by members of the indigenous
reservation in that sector, obstructing thereby the constitutional
work of guaranteeing security in the national territory.”
Source: Ariel Cabrera, “El Ejército desmantela tres refinerías de petróleo clandestinas del Eln en el Catatumbo (The Army dismantles three
clandestine ELN oil refineries),” Radio Santafé, 22 April 2020. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2020/04/22/ejercito-desmantela-3-refinerias-depetroleo-clandestinas-del-eln-en-la-region-del-catatumbo/
“The military operations, within the framework of the Heroes of Liberty Campaign plan, was begun in El Porvenir, Tibú county, a sector
in which men of the Land Operations Battalion #9 located three illegal precursor refineries, equipped with three locally made distillers
(marcianos), three pools for the storage of stolen crude, 12 metal tankards, and 370 meters of two-inch hose…
The Second Division of the National Army indicated it would continue its operations to dismantle the illicit economies of groups on the
margin of the law that converge in Catatumbo.”
Source: Editors, “El gobierno debe parar el secuestro de militares y policías por grupos de indígenas (The government must stop the
kidnapping of soldiers and policemen by indigenous groups),” La Linterna Azul, 5 May 2020. http://www.lalinternaazul.info/2020/05/05/
comunicado-a-la-opinion-publica-del-cuerpo-de-generales-y-almirantes-en-retiro-de-las-ff-mm/
“The Retired Generals and Admirals Corps views with great concern the continuing occurrence of kidnappings of soldiers and policemen by
groups that refuse to respect authority, as occurred Friday, 1 May, in Caloto [county], Cauca Department, where the Public Force was taken
hostage by members of the indigenous reservation in that sector, obstructing thereby the constitutional work of guaranteeing security in the
national territory.”

OE Watch | June 2020

73

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Colombia Warfare Update
Source: Editors, “Siguen operativos militares en Corinto (Military operations continue in Corinto),” Diario Occidente, 21 April 2020. https://
occidente.co/regionales/cauca/siguen-operativos-en-corinto/
“Yesterday the Army furthered operations in the mountainous zone of Corinto [county] after the police station in that locality had been
harassed by an illegal armed group…
Additionally, the Cauca Specific Army Command reported yesterday that there were firefights on presentation of FARC dissidents in Santa
Elena township, an uphill part of the county, where a military base is located…”
Source: Ariel Cabrera, “El Ejército abatió a ocho integrantes de las Farc en el Cauca (The Army took down eight members of the FARC in
Cauca),” Radio Santafé, 15 April 2020. http://www.radiosantafe.com/2020/04/15/ejercito-abatio-a-8-integrantes-de-las-disidencias-de-lasfarc-en-el-cauca/
“Highlighted in the military report is that the eight anti-socials were taken down in an overwhelming military operation framed within the
joint military maneuvers furthered by the National Army Third Division, responding to calls received to counter firefights between the selfstyled ‘Carlos Patiño Mobil Column’ [FARC] and the ‘José María Becerra Front’ of the ELN, that are disputing drug smuggling routes of the
Micay river valley…The military action…developed in Argelia county…”
Source: Richard Aguirre Fernández, “Irregularidades sacan a 11 militares y a un general (Irregularities take out 11 officers and a general),” El
Colombiano, 2 May 2020. https://www.elcolombiano.com/colombia/irregularidades-sacan-a-11-militares-y-a-un-general-LI12924258
“The Minister of Defense, Carlos Holmes Trujillo, made known that 11 military officers were retired from their duties and that a general
requested ‘la baja’, that is to say, voluntary retirement from active service. In a press conference, the minister indicated that the decisions
were taken due to the ‘irregular employment of military intelligence capacities’, exactly those that had been informed of, principally by the
Revista Semana…General (ret) Jaime Ruiz Barrera, president of the Association of Retired Officers of the Military Forces (ACORE), in dialog
with El Colombiano, indicated that…he was in agreement with the decision taken…”

Book Review: A Look Back and Forward at
Turkey’s “Strategic Depth” Foreign Policy Doctrine
Karen Kaya
February 2020
“Strategic Depth (Stratejik Derinlik)” is a Turkish book published
in 2001. This was a time when international relations theorists were
describing new frameworks of world order and security modalities
following the end of the Cold War and bi-polar world. Works such as
Francis Fukuyama’s “End of History” and Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of
Civilizations” were icons of this intellectual period. It was in this context
of a changing international system that Turkish International Relations
Professor Ahmet Davutoğlu (who later served as Foreign Minister
between 2009-2014 and Prime Minister between 2014-2016) attempted
to define Turkey’s position in his book “Strategic Depth.” From around
2002 to 2012, the foreign policy that Davutoğlu outlined in his book
was considered the doctrine and roadmap for Turkish foreign policy.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/309386
OE Watch | June 2020

74

LATIN AMERICA
Miscellaneous Venezuelan Misery
OE Watch Commentary: Can things get worse for Venezuelans? For those living in Venezuela, the answer always seems to be yes. It is yet
too difficult to confidently assert what the direct effect of the coronavirus pandemic is like in Venezuela, at least from unclassified sources. The
secondary effects, however, are patently not good. The first accompanying reference is of comments made by the owner of the premier foodstuffs
producer in the country. He is warning about the danger government price controls pose to the food supply. The second reference is a sarcastically
toned report on comments from the Bolivarian Labor Minister, who asserts that the re-accelerating rise in prices is impossible to explain. The
third and fourth references are exemplary of twitter reporting about looting in various parts of the country, a phenomenon that had heretofore
been avoided. The fifth reference brings to the fore an unfortunate economic consideration previously not reported. Remittances from expatriate
family members, which for many families inside Venezuela had provided survival income, have dried out since restaurants and other business in
the United States, Spain and other émigré destinations started closing down due to the pandemic. The last reference fits into the context of all of
the above. Evidently, the Bolivarian regime is taking more political prisoners as part of its response to worsening public morale. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“The decision of the regime to toughen price controls [is] an attempt to stop
the galloping inflation that has unleashed a growing social ill-will in the last
few days, manifesting itself in some protests and lootings of businesses.”
“Human rights defenders and family members accuse that they [the regime] are
taking advantage of the quarantine to increase persecution, repression, illegal
movement and psychological tortures…”
Source: Editors, “La mayor empresa de alimentos en Venezuela alertó por un riesgo de desabastecimiento (The biggest food company in
Venezuela warns of the risk of shortages),” Infobae and AP, 26 April 2020. https://www.infobae.com/america/venezuela/2020/04/26/la-mayorempresa-de-alimentos-en-venezuela-alerto-por-un-riesgo-de-desabastecimiento/
“The decision of the regime to toughen price controls [is] an attempt to stop the galloping inflation that has unleashed a growing social ill-will in the last few days, manifesting itself in
some protests and lootings of businesses. Nevertheless, it [the decision] caused a tough reaction from the president of the conglomerate, Lorenzo Mendoza, who considered the measures
applied to Alimentos Polar, one of the companies of the group, as arbitrary…
In the middle of the medical emergency due to the new coronavirus, which has left 313 infected and 10 dead to this date [26 April] (according to official numbers), the prices of foodstuffs
and other goods has suffered a strong acceleration due in part to the jump in the exchange rate on the black market and to problems of distribution of foodstuffs generated by the shortage
of gasoline, that has made transport costs higher.”

Source: Jesús Herrera, “¡Economía Básica! Ministro de Trabajo: No hay explicación para el aumento desmedido de los precios (Economics
101! Labor Minister: There is no explanation for the disproportionate increase in prices),” Noticiero Digital, 24 April 2020. https://www.
noticierodigital.com/2020/04/pinate-no-hay-explicacion-para-el-aumento-desmedido-de-los-precios/
“The Chavista Labor Minister, Eduardo Piñate, indicated this Friday that a battle against speculation is being carried out, and he used the moment to opine that at this time there is no
explanation for the disproportionate increase in the prices of products.”

Source: Editors, “Hordas saquearon el hotel Portofino de Nueva Esparta (Hordes loot the Portofino hotel in Nueva Esparta),” Dolartoday and
Twitter, 26 April 2020 https://dolartoday.com/fotos-y-videos-hordas-saquearon-el-hotel-portofino-de-nueva-esparta/
“The Hotel Portofino in Playa El Agua in Margarita was vandalized this Sunday afternoon. The National Police detained several of the looters and recovered stolen objects, among
them mattresses, furniture and kitchen items.”

Source: Editors, “Reportan saqueos en Barquisimeto (Looting reported in Barquisimeto),” Dolartoday and Twitter, 27 April 2020. https://
dolartoday.com/videos-reportan-saqueos-en-barquisimeto-27abr/
“Twitter users reported lootings in the city of Barquisemeto. In videos broadcast on Twitter, civilians are seen looting food from stores after breaking storefronts of the businesses.”

Source: Jennifer Orozco, “Remesas Dejan de Existir Durante Pandemia (Remittaances Cease to Exist during Pandemic),” La Prensa Diario
de Lara, 25 April 2020. https://www.laprensalara.com.ve/nota/15399/2020/04/remesas-dejan-de-existir-durante-la-pandemia
“The business closings around the world due to the COVID-19 pandemic are putting at risk the remittances of family economies that depend on them…The Director of Ecoanalítica,
Asdrúbal Oliveros, estimates that a fall of at least 30% of the remittances, depending on the gravity of the world crisis that is affecting employment, while Luis Vicente [NFI] says that
there is already a 35% recorded decrease in deliveries of money from outside Venezuela…”

Source: Estefani Brito, “El régimen suma nuevos presos políticos, mientras la cuarentena empeora sus condiciones de reclusion (The regime
adds new political prisoners while the quarantine worsens the conditions of imprisonment),” El Nacional, 26 April 2020. https://www.
elnacional.com/venezuela/el-regimen-suma-nuevos-presos-politicos-mientras-la-cuarentena-empeora-sus-condiciones-de-reclusion/
“…According to Foro Penal [Human Rights NGO focused on Venezuela], since April 23, 70 new detentions for political reasons have been recorded. Human rights defenders and family
members accuse that they [the regime] are taking advantage of the quarantine to increase persecution, repression, illegal movement and psychological tortures…”

OE Watch | June 2020

75

LATIN AMERICA
Daniel Ortega Reappears
OE Watch Commentary: In last month’s OE Watch, we reported
on the unexplained disappearance of Nicaraguan dictator Daniel
Ortega. He has since reappeared in public, as noted in the first
accompanying reference of 16 April. Curiously, according to the
reportage, Ortega has still not mentioned why he went missing for
more than a month in the middle of the coronavirus pandemic. In any
case, he reasserted the policy of his administration to do very little
to confront the virus. The second accompanying reference is more
recent -- a 1500-word complaint essay about the indifference of the
Ortega regime to the pandemic. The outlet is generally anti-regime,
so we might have to discount some of the invective, but there is little
doubt that the official government data in Nicaragua is all but useless
and that the government’s laisse faire approach is more radical than
that of most other countries. It may be hard to ever tell with certainty,
given the dearth of testing and records, but toward the end of this
summer, Nicaragua may have become the extreme comparative
epidemiological case as far as policy approaches to the pandemic
goes. With the medical outcome, we will also await what effect, if any,
the regime’s pandemic policy has regarding its hold on political power
in the country. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

Daniel Ortega.

Source: Fundscion Ong DE Nicaragua via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Comandante_Daniel_Ortega_Celbreando_su_
nuevo_ttiunfi_Presidencial.jpg, CC BY 3.0

“At no time during his speech did Ortega explain
why he was absent for 34 days…”
“We are going to see ... the natural evolution of the sickness…”
Source: Wilfredo Miranda, “Daniel Ortega reaparece tras 34 días y vuelve a minimizar el impacto de la pandemia en Nicaragua (Daniel
Ortega reappears after 34 days and goes back to minimizing the impact of the pandemic in Nicaragua),” El País, 16 April 2020. https://elpais.
com/sociedad/2020-04-16/daniel-ortega-reaparece-tras-34-dias-y-vuelve-a-minimizar-el-impacto-de-la-pandemia-en-nicaragua.html
“The Sandinista ruler did not explain the reasons for his prolonged absence and, in turn, minimized the impact of the pandemic in his
nation and in his speech focused on criticizing ‘nuclear bombs’…At no time during his speech did Ortega explain why he was absent for 34
days. This disappearance in the middle of the COVID-19 health threat was the longest in his presidential terms…He discarded decreeing a
quarantine or social distancing, arguing economic reasons…”

Source: Arlen Cerda, “Los brotes de covid-19 desbordan al régimen de Daniel Ortega (Outbreaks of COVID-19 overwhelming the Ortega
regime),” Confidencial, 11 May, 2020. https://confidencial.com.ni/brotes-de-covid-19-en-nicaragua-desbordan-al-regimen-de-daniel-ortega/
“Doctors warn: hospitals are full and there are infected medical personnel; they are calling on the population to continue preventive
measures to reduce the catastrophe…The administration presented its last official report the fifth of May, when after 48 hours of official
silence it added only one positive case to the list of confirmed cases, about which it offered no data regarding their contracting nexus, age,
or gender. Then, there were no more reports in a silence of more than five consecutive days that continues to today…Doctor [Carlos] Quant
[infectious disease specialist] declared that ‘without participation of the State, what we are going to see is the natural evolution of the
sickness’, and in two weeks we will see the saturation of the hospitals, that in addition are going to see their capacity even more limited by the
health workers who are sick…”
OE Watch | June 2020

76

LATIN AMERICA
COVID-19 in Ecuador and Peru
OE Watch Commentary: Last month, we noted that the country
of Ecuador was being reported as especially suffering the pandemic
as compared to the rest of the region (see: “Ecuador Worst Hit by
COVID-19?” OE Watch, May 2020). The Peruvian sports network
Depor was paying close attention to the Ecuadoran outbreak,
especially as it struck Guayaquil. Since then, Depor shifted its
coronavirus coverage to other countries, particularly to Peru itself.
The contagion in Peru may have not quite hit its peak, while in
Ecuador it appeared to be ameliorating, according to regional
reportage. As indicated in the second accompanying excerpt
from an article published in the legacy Ecuadoran newspaper El
Comercio on 10 May, the virus in Ecuador seemed to have peaked.
The El Comercio article provided exhaustive data about the
pandemic in Ecuador in charts and graphs. The collection effort
and transparency of data provided by the government of Ecuador
as compared to the government of Nicaragua is as day to night (see:
“Daniel Ortega Reappears” in this issue of OE Watch). Beyond the
data, the third accompanying reference, from the Guayaquil-based
Aerial view of Guayaquil, Ecuador.
Source: JorgeAlejanDroo via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aerial_Guayaquil.jpg, CC by SA 4.0
online periodical Expreso, provides a long array of anecdotal stories
and stunning photographs of Ecuadoran life, especially economic, as affected by the pandemic. End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“This significant increment in the numbers obliged the
President of the Republic, Martín Vizcarra to take drastic
measures such as extending the quarantine for two more
weeks until the 24th of May…”
“…the report registers a reduction in the numbers as to the total
of probable deaths [in Ecuador]…”
Source: Editors, “Coronavirus Perú EN VIVO: cifras oficiales de contagio por COVID-19, minuto a minuto y últimas medidas de Martín
Vizcarra (Coronavirus in Perú live: official contagion numbers for COVID-19, minute by minute and measures taken by Martín Vizcara),”
Depor, 14 May 2020. https://depor.com/off-side/coronavirus-peru-en-vivo-hoy-jueves-14-de-mayo-online-en-directo-ultima-hora-breakingnumero-de-contagiados-casos-confirmados-positivos-muertes-medidas-del-gobierno-y-mas-noticias-en-lima-callao-ica-loreto-piura-y-masciudades-conferencia-martin-vizcarra-noticia/
“The coronavirus in Peru is growing at an exaggerated pace. With the first phase of economic reactivation approved by the government already underway, a progressive return to
normal is hoped for…
According to reports of the Health Ministry, in all of Peruvian territory there are 76,306 positive cases, of which 6,979 are now hospitalized and 2,169 have died…This significant
increment in the numbers obliged the President of the Republic, Martín Vizcarra to take drastic measures such as extending the quarantine for two more weeks until the 24th of May…”

Source: Editors, “Covid-19 en Ecuador: 29 559 personas contagiadas y 3 642 fallecidos en el contexto de la pandemia (COVID-19 in
Ecuador: 29,559 persons contracted and 3,642 dead in the context of the pandemic),” El Comercio, 10 May 2020. https://www.elcomercio.
com/actualidad/balance-contagios-fallecidos-coronavirus-covid19.html
“This Sunday, 10 May 2020, as the country celebrates Mother’s Day, Ecuador awakes with 29, 559 persons contracted and 3,642 dead in the context of the COVID-19: 2,127 due to the
affectation of the coronavirus and another `1,515 suspected of having the sickness. This is the official total of the impact of the virus on the national scale as of 10:00 this Sunday after the
processing of 84, 287 tests.. Also, the report registers a reduction in the numbers as to the total of probable deaths.”

Source: Editors, “Coronavirus en Ecuador y el mundo: mapa, noticias, casos y más (Coronavirus in Ecuador and the world: map, news, cases
and more),” Expreso, 14 May 2020. https://www.expreso.ec/actualidad/coronavirus-mundo-ecuador-informacion-minuto-minuto-6162.html
“…In a small part of Daule [a neighborhood in Guayaquil] that is embedded between the cantons of Guayaquil and Durán is Aurora, where yesterday on the one hand joy reined, the
biggest shopping center (El Dorado) having opened; and on the other hand, uncertainty regarding controls on movement and the worry that a new wave of coronavirus victims could
cover the zone…”

OE Watch | June 2020

77

LATIN AMERICA
China’s COVID-19 Support to Peru Linked to
Infrastructure Plans
OE Watch Commentary: The outbreak of coronavirus in Peru caused concern, given that the Peruvian economy depends heavily on exports to
China, the country’s largest trading partner. Many Peruvian fishing companies stopped sending fish shipments to China due to port closures and
shipping barges became stranded in China without the option of leaving.
In response to concerns, Liang Yu, China’s Ambassador to Peru, made a statement to news source America Economía urging patience saying,
“Trade between China and Peru will not be affected in the long run. Instead, demand for typical products such as fish, copper and fruit will
continue to grow throughout the year.” Liang also indicated that Chinese and Peruvian officials are planning on holding talks sometime in October
or November of 2020 when China will discuss plans related to future investment and infrastructure development in Peru.
As part of planned dialogue, Liang indicated that, “It is important for the Peruvian government to present us with their infrastructure investment
plan regarding the construction of an intercontinental railway that would provide transportation and logistical movement of goods to the most
important maritime ports and airports.” The estimated cost of the project is $60 million, but there is talk that the costs would be shared by China,
Peru and Bolivia. The end goal of building an intercontinental railway is to help reduce costs of moving commodities from Brazil to Peruvian
ports.
As Peruvian news source Gestion points out, “Chinese company BGI offered the Peruvian Ministry of Health over 1,000 kits that can confirm
the illness within 3 hours... to help prevent and control new cases that may appear in the country.” China is providing Peru support as the country
deals with coronavirus, but that support may be related to economic interests. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Trade (because of the coronavirus) between China and
Peru will not be affected in the long run. Instead, demand for
typical products such as fish, copper and fruit will continue
to grow throughout the year.”
-Liang Yu, Chinese Ambassador to Peru

Source: “China asegura que el comercio con Perú se mantendrá pese al coronavirus (China Assures that Trade with Peru Will Continue
Despite Coronavirus),” America Economía, 20 February 2020. https://www.americaeconomia.com/economia-mercados/comercio/chinaasegura-que-el-comercio-con-peru-se-mantendra-pese-al-coronavirus
Liang Yu, China’s Ambassador to Peru, is urging patience as, “Trade between China and Peru will not be affected in the long run. Instead,
demand for typical products such as fish, copper and fruit will continue to grow throughout the year.”

Source: “Coronavirus: China ofrece donación de reactivos a Perú para realizar pruebas rápidas de diagnósticos (Coronavirus: China Offers
Testing Kits to Rapidly Diagnose Coronavirus in Peru),” Gestion, 06 March 2020. https://gestion.pe/peru/coronavirus-en-peru-china-ofrecedonacion-de-reactivos-para-realizar-pruebas-rapidas-de-diagnosticos-covid-19-nndc-noticia/
Following the confirmation of Peru’s first case of Covid-19, Chinese company BGI offered the Peruvian Ministry of Health over 1,000 kits
that can confirm the illness within 3 hours. The end goal of the donation is to help prevent and control new cases that may appear in the
country.

OE Watch | June 2020

78

LATIN AMERICA
Fake News in Bolivia
OE Watch Commentary: According to El Diario, a conservative Bolivian
newspaper founded by the Corrasco family in 1904, various social media
networks and news outlets have been using disinformation to relentlessly criticize
the Jeanine Añez administration for such actions as transporting individuals via
flights provided by the Bolivian Air Force. El Diario quotes an anonymous source
who claims Añez’s political opponents are taking advantage of the tense situation
regarding COVID-19 in an attempt to sway public opinion to wear down the
government image. The author implies the Jeanine Añez administration has no
opportunity to defend itself while facing the COVID-19 crisis.
Jeanine Añez has been serving as Bolivia’s interim president since the Evo
Morales govenrment’s resignation in November 2019. Described by journalists as
having a right wing, anti-Morales political position, her interim term will end with
the 2020 elections, which have been postponed indefinitely due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Jeanine Añez.

Fearing for their safety, Evo Morales and key members of his government Source: Noticias Al Dia via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jeanine_A%C3%B1ez_en_discurso_del_22_
de_enero_de_2020.png, CC BY 3.0
sought political asylum in Mexico after the Bolivian military and police called for
his resignation amid protests regarding the validity of the November 2019 presidential elections. End OE Watch Commentary (Lundell)
Source: “Presenciamos un desborde de desinformación en medios y redes” (We’re Seeing an Overflow of Disinformation in the Media and
on the Internet),” El Diario, 11 May 2020 https://www.eldiario.net/noticias/2020/2020_05/nt200511/politica.php?n=44&-presenciamos-undesborde-de-desinformacion-en-medios-y-redes
While the world faces the Covid-19 pandemic, the priority in Bolivia is the political agenda, through the political use of certain media outlets,
which is overflowing with disinformation on social networks, said journalist Iván Rada, in contact with El Diario.
The source affirmed that the country has entered a new electoral process and politicians use each other for campaign purposes, especially
against the current government, while the Jeanine Añez administration is facing Covid-19.
“After the scandal caused by a former Entel executive, the media ended the stage of truce that had been granted to the government, after the
fall of the Evo Morales regime in November 2019,” he explained.

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment Watch
dating back to 2011. They provide
translated selections with background
from a diverse range of foreign
media that our analysts and expert
contributors believe will give security
professionals an added dimension
to their critical thinking about the
Operational Environment.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | June 2020

79

LATIN AMERICA
Uruguay Considers Changes to Immigration Laws to
Attract Foreign Investment
OE Watch Commentary: Uruguayan President Luis Lacalle Pou appears to
believe that one way to achieve a stronger and more robust economy is to make it
easier for people to immigrate to Uruguay by investing in the country. As reported
in Argentinian news source Infobae, Lacalle Pou stated that, “Our economic team is
determined to open Uruguayan borders so that hundreds of thousands of individuals
can come and live in our country no matter what their nationality.” Lacalle Pou
further indicated that proposed immigration changes are intended to attract foreign
investment and to help the country grow and develop. And although Lacalle Pou is
calling for migrants from around the globe, he is already looking to neighboring
Argentina as a start because he believes that wealthy and educated Argentinians will
be allured by generous tax breaks being offered in Uruguay.
In order to attract migrants, Lacalle Pou stressed the importance of changing
Uruguay’s current fiscal and legal rules for residency and subsequent citizenship. In
an interview with Argentinian news source Infobae, Uruguayan Tourism Minister
Germán Cardoso elaborated on requisites required for migrants to do so. When
questioned about investments needed to obtain fiscal residence, Cardoso indicated
that Portugal is inspiring as they have increased their population by lowering fiscal
requirements to $500,000. Currently, the fiscal requirement in Uruguay is $1,800,000
and requires investors to stay in the country for six months. Proposed changes include
lowering the investment amount to $500,000 and allowing investors to come and go
during the six-month period before being granted residency.
By lowering the fiscal requirement, Uruguay is looking for investors, but Cardoso
was adamant in stating that, “We do not want illicit capital. Instead, we are looking
to attract families and investors with transparent financial resources who want to live
and prosper in our country.” In addition to lowing fiscal requirements for migrants,
Uruguayan President Luis Lacalle Pou.
Source: NaBUru38 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lacalle_Pou_2019.jpg, CC by SA 4.0
Lacalle Pou also wants to modify requirements regarding the 180 days migrants
must stay in Uruguay before they can apply for legal residency. The proposed plan does not change the number of days migrants must stay in the
country, but it allows them the flexibility to enter and leave Uruguay as long as they have enrolled their children in school, purchased a home, or
taken other actions that demonstrate they want to stay in Uruguay.
Lacalle Pou’s plan to attract foreigners has faced criticism at home and abroad as indicated in Uruguayan news source Montevideo Portal. The
most visceral criticism came from former Uruguayan President José Mujica, who argued that “instead of bringing 100,000 Argentines…Lacalle
Pou should worry about Uruguayans investing in their own country.” Argentine President Alberto Fernández also warned that Lacalle Pou’s plan
to ease financial regulations could turn Uruguay into a “tax haven.” End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Proposed immigration changes do not focus on converting
Uruguay into a [fiscal] paradise, or anything else out of the ordinary.
Instead, we are just looking to lower immigration requirements
as Uruguay needs more inhabitants, a larger work force, foreign
investment and an expanded consumer base.”

OE Watch | June 2020

80

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Uruguay Considers Changes to Immigration
Laws to Attract Foreign Investment
Source: “Lacalle Pou Pou dijo que buscará “abrir las fronteras” de Uruguay para que lleguen “miles y miles” de inmigrantes (Lacalle Pou Will
Look for Ways to Open Uruguayan Borders for Thousands and Thousands of Immigrants),” Infobae, 24 February 2020.
https://www.infobae.com/america/america-latina/2020/02/24/Lacalle Pou-pou-dijo-que-buscara-abrir-las-fronteras-de-uruguay-para-quelleguen-miles-y-miles-de-inmigrantes/
“Our economic team is determined to open borders so that hundreds of thousands of individuals can come and live in Uruguay no matter
what their nationality.” Lacalle Pou also added that, “Proposed immigration changes are not aimed at converting Uruguay into a (fiscal)
paradise, or anything strange. Instead, we (the government) are simply looking to lower immigration requirements as we need a country with
more inhabitants where people can come to invest, work, and expand our consumption base.”

Source: “Todo lo que hay que saber para poder radicarse en Uruguay: así es la flexibilización que ya definió el próximo Gobierno (Everything
there is to Know about Living in Uruguay and the Flexibilization Outlined by the Government),” Infobae, 13 January 2020.
https://www.infobae.com/sociedad/2020/01/13/todo-lo-que-hay-que-saber-para-poder-radicarse-en-uruguay-asi-es-la-flexibilizacion-que-yadefinio-el-proximo-gobierno/
Fiscal requirements for foreign national to obtain legal residency currently requires a $1,800,000 investment and a six-month consecutive
stay in the country. For Tourism Minister German Cardoso, such requirements “make it difficult” to attract residents from other countries
and suggestions have been made to lower fiscal residency investments to $500,000. Despite decreasing investment criteria, Cardoso made it
clear that “We (Uruguay) are not looking to attract illicit funds. Instead, we want families and investors with transparent financial resources
who desire to live and prosper in our country.”

Source: “Mujica criticó propuesta de Lacalle, que definió como “traer 100.000 cagadores argentinos (Mujica Criticizes Lacalle’s Proposal
to Bring 100,000 Argentinian Farsantes),” Montevideo Portal, 15 January 2020. https://www.montevideo.com.uy/Noticias/Mujica-criticopropuesta-de-Lacalle-que-definio-como-traer-100-000-cagadores-argentinos--uc741200
Former Uruguayan President José Mujica is adamantly opposed to Lacalle Pou’s proposed open border initiative plan and stated that,
“Instead of bringing a hundred thousand Argentine fraudsters, let’s worry that our investors invest here (...) We have about US $ 24 billion
scattered around the world. Why don’t we make it a priority to try and recoup that money for Uruguay?”
Argentine President Alberto Fernández has also been openly critical of Lacalle Pou’s intentions and indicated that Uruguay had a hard time
proving that it was not a tax haven in the past, and that re-opening that door does not seem like a good idea. Fernández also stated that, “The
Frente Amplio, with ‘Pepe’ (Mujica), (Danilo) Astori and Tabaré (Vázquez) did a phenomenal job in removing the notion that Uruguay was a
tax haven and that it did not obtain money spuriously.

The RED DIAMOND is the Army’s leading e-journal
highlighting current threats in the Operational
Environment.
It is published by TRADOC G-2 OEE ACE Threats
Integration and is posted at:
https://atn.army.mil/tradoc-g2/operational-environmentpublications/red-diamond-newsletter
OE Watch | June 2020

81

LATIN AMERICA
Jalisco New Generation Cartel (CJNG) Distributes
Essentials amid COVID-19 Pandemic
OE Watch Commentary: Members of Jalisco New Generation Cartel (CJNG) have been seen delivering boxes of essential items across
communities. According to accompanying Mexican news source La Verdad Noticias, photos of CJNG boxes have been circulating across social
media, with decals on the boxes that read “From your friends CJNG, COVID-19 emergency support.” The article specifically references deliveries
to various ranches in San Luis Potosí, but also deliveries since 12 April 2020 in Salinas de Hidalgo, Villa de Arriga, Villa de Reyes, Santa María
del Río, Tierra Nueva, Rioverde, Villa de Zaragoza, and Soledad de Graciano Sánchez.
According to another Mexico news outlet, Vanguardia, CJNG trucks were seen in Cuautitlán, a southern city in Jalisco, delivering goods to
residents. The report indicates that some boxes had decals reading “Given in the name of ‘El Señor de los Gallos,” better known as ‘El Mencho.’
Both reports note that there has been an uptick in cartels delivering goods to communities since the outbreak of the pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic is resulting in the Mexican cartels responding to the situation in a number of ways. Some cartels appear to be trying to
seize an opportunity to fill a governance void by providing handouts and aid to local residents, as seen in this instance. Others are also engaging in
quarantine enforcement (the Sinaloa Cartel) and the levying of a special pandemic tax to supposedly help pay for community aid (the Los Viagras
cartel). End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker/Keshavarz)

“CJNG is using the pandemic as an opportunity
to ingratiate themselves with the population across
different municipalities.”
Source: “CJNG reparte despensa por coronavirus ahora en San Luis Potosí (CJNG distributes pantry items for coronavirus, now in San Luis
Potosí),” La Verdad Noticias, 14 April 2020. https://laverdadnoticias.com/crimen/CJNG-reparte-despensa-por-coronavirus-ahora-en-San-LuisPotosi-20200414-0033.html
Hitmen of the CJNG were seen delivering boxes with pantry to the town of San Luis Potosi.
... On this occasion, various photos of pantry boxes signed by the CJNG began to circulate on social networks, which are packed with the
assassins’ trucks. These boxes had a decal that could be read: “From your friends CJNG, COVID-19 emergency support.”
Source: “Cártel de Jalisco regala despensas por coronavirus, de parte de ‘El Mencho’ (Jalisco cartel distributes pantry items for coronavirus,
from ‘El Mencho’),” Vanguardia, 14 April 2020. https://vanguardia.com.mx/articulo/cartel-de-jalisco-regala-despensas-por-coronavirus-departe-de-el-mencho
“Boxes of delivered goods had decals reading ‘given in the name of ‘El Señor de los Gallos,’ better known as ‘El Mencho.’”

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download

OE Watch | June 2020

82

LATIN AMERICA
Mexico: Explosives and Drones found in Cholua,
Intended for Terrorism
OE Watch Commentary: In early May, the Prosecutors Office and the
Secretariat of National Defense (SEDENA) carried out searches for explosives
and other munitions in the municipality of San Andrés Cholula, in the Mexican
state of Puebla. According to Mexican news outlet El Sol de Puebla, Office of
the Attorney General (FGR), and the Special Prosecutor for Organized Crime
(SEIDO), authorities found C4, homemade bombs, and drones which were
allegedly intended for terrorist attacks.
According to Mexican news outlet Milenio, on 22 April, SEIDO opened an
investigation after receiving an anonymous tip. The tip alleged that certain
bombing materiel was linked to the March car bombing in Celaya in the state
of Guanajuato. On 25 April, the Federal Public Ministry authorized the search
of three homes in Puebla. In addition to explosives and drones, authorities
found gunpowder, a variety of firearms and magazines of different calibers,
seven cell phones and 53 SIM cards, and three radio communication devices,
among other objects.

Source: Office of the Attorney General (FGR), Twitter, @FGRMexico, https://twitter.com/FGRMexico/status/1257016365287911426

As the accompanying images from the Office of the Attorney General show, two quadcopter drones appear to be from the DJI Inspire series
while another one appears to be from the DJI Phantom series. Two controllers are situated behind the drones, which have been retrofitted with
circuit boards and wiring for weaponization purposes. The rear section of a DJI Inspire series drone is also retrofitted with a circuit board and
wiring for weaponization purposes. The ‘homemade bombs’ have been identified as mortar bomb fireworks (‘chrysanthemums’). They were likely
to be an IED component of the weaponized drones.
The seizure of the drones and explosives represents the third incident in which weaponized drones (or the components of weaponized drones)
linked to organized crime groups have been encountered in Mexico—the first being in October 2017 in Valtierrilla, Guanajuato and then another
later in June 2018 in Tecate, Baja just below the US-Mexico border. The SEIDO terrorism allegations are of significance because, rather than
being politically inspired, they are motivated for criminal impunity purposes related to narco-terrorism. End OE Watch Commentary (Bunker/
Keshavarz)

“The Office of the Attorney General began an investigation for
alleged crimes by organized crime groups with intent to commit
terrorist attacks, after finding explosive properties like C4 that may be
related to attacks like the one that occurred in March in Guanajuato
when a car bomb exploded in Celaya.”
Source: Paulina Gómez, “Explosivo, bombas caseras, armas y drones se hallaron en cateos de Cholula (Explosives, homemade bombs,
weapons and drones found during a search in Cholula),” El Sol de Puebla, 3 May 2020. https://www.elsoldepuebla.com.mx/policiaca/
explosivo-bombas-caseras-armas-y-drones-se-hallaron-en-cateos-de-cholula-5181930.html
C4, homemade bombs, firearms, cell phones and drones found, to be allegedly used for terrorist attacks, according to the Office of the
Attorney General and Office of the Special Prosecution for Organized Crime (SEIDO).
Source: Rubén Mosso, “FGR halla explosivos; indaga por terrorismo (FGR found explosives; indicates terrorism),” Milenio, 5 May 2020.
https://www.milenio.com/policia/inicia-fgr-pesquisa-delito-finalidad-cometer-terrorismo
The Office of the Attorney General began an investigation for alleged crimes by organized crime groups that want to commit terror, after
finding explosive substances like C4 that may be related to attacks like the one that occurred in March in Guanajuato when a car bomb
exploded in Celaya.
OE Watch | June 2020

83

