https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH

Volume 10
Issue #3
March 2020

Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 The Role of the S-350 Vityaz in Russian Air Defense
5 Russia’s Increasing Bridging Capabilities: Military and Civil
Motives
8 Russia’s Spetsnaz to Get New “Flying Tank” Special
Operations Helicopter
9 The 3BM44 “Lekalo” Fin-Stabilized Subcaliber Projectile
10 Russian Nuclear Submarines Testing Rockets to Fire
through Arctic Ice
11 Russian Coast Guard to Strengthen Presence in the Arctic
12 Russia Prepares Ambitious Economic Strategy for Arctic
Region
14 Russia, China and the Coronavirus
15 Russia to Provide Special Legal Status for ERA Technopolis
16 Military Perspectives and Some Critique on Russia’s New
Government and Economy
17 Letters to Great-Grandfathers at the Front: Developing
Military Patriotism in Russian Society
18 “Borderization” Continues in Georgia
19 A Resolution to Kyrgyz-Tajik Border Problems?
20 The Geopolitics of TurkStream and the Complexities of
Bulgaria’s Foreign Policy
22 Huawei in Europe: Debating Europe’s Position in a New
Technological Cold War
INDO-PACIFIC
24 The Strategic Implications of Chinese-Iranian-Russian
Naval Drills in the Indian Ocean
26 Considering “The Ground Battlefield Under Informatized
Conditions”

28 The “Blade of Victory”: A Chinese Perspective on Drone
Swarms
29 China Summons the PLA to Prevent and Contain the
Coronavirus
31 Abu Sayyaf Kidnapping Indonesians at Sea
32 Indonesia to Bolster Nationalism to Deradicalize Returning
ISIS Members
33 The Indian Military’s Concerns with Chinese 5G
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
34 Russia Facilitates Dialogue between Turkey and Syria
36 Russian Special Operations in Syria
37 Turkey’s Cooperation with Ukraine: A Message to Russia?
39 TurkStream’s Role in Energy Security and Turkish-Russian
Relations
40 Russia’s Outreach to the Kurdistan Regional Government
of Iraq
42 Libya Conflict: Oil as the Latest Weapon
44 Egypt Proposes Joint African Military Counterterrorism
Force
46 Speculation on Egyptian Cross-Border Military
Deployment
48 Mauritania and the UAE’s Expanding Influence in the West
African Sahel
50 Shifting Dynamics in Yemen as Houthis Advance East of
Sana’a
52 Turkey to Build Fifth-Generation Stealth Fighter Jet
54 Israeli Defense Forces to Increase Integration, Agility and
Lethality

56 Iran: Increasing Domestic Production of Rare Earth Elements
57 Counterfeit Bank Notes Seized in Iran
58 Solar Power Plant Opens in Tehran Province
AFRICA
59 Shiny Metals for Shiny Arms: Russia and Mozambique’s Trade
Agreement
60 Kenya Weighs Whether to Keep Forces in Somalia Against AlShabaab
61 Burkina Faso: Fertile Soil for Homegrown Terrorists
62 Burkina Faso: Sahelian Jihadists Conduct Massacre
63 Burkina Faso to Arm and Train Civilians to Counter Terrorist
Groups
64 Al-Qaeda Loyalists Defect to ISIS in the Sahel
65 Boko Haram Threatens to Cut Borno State from Nigeria
66 Mali Army Returns to Kidal after Six Year Absence
LATIN AMERICA
68 Russian Foreign Minister Comments on the US in Latin
America
69 Russia-Cuba Relations Continue Revival
70 Juan Guaidó and Cubazuela
72 ELN Gaining Strength in Colombia and Venezuela
73 ELN and FARC Involvement in Colombia’s Protest Marches
75 Coca Spraying in Colombia
76 El Salvador’s Constitutional Crisis
77 Panama Lifts Weapons Moratorium
78 Social Networking Enables Kidnappers in Ciudad Juarez,
Mexico

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 10 | Issue 3

March | 2020

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Chuck Bartles
Jennifer Byrne
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Karen Kaya
Greg Sarafian
Matthew Stein
Sergey Sukhankin

Indo-Pacific

Syed Fazl-e Haider
Andrew Hartnett

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Burkina Faso soldiers during a military exercise

Source: Spc. Britany Slessman/AFRICOM/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flintlock_2017_small_unit_
tactics_training_in_Burkina_Faso_170301-A-ZF167-075.jpg, Public Domain

Cindy Hurst
Matthew Stein
Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Chuck Bartles
Zachary Fesen
Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Dodge Billingsley
Robert Feldman
Jacob Zenn

Latin America

Geoff Demarest
Brenda Fiegel

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Karen Kaya

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
The Role of the S-350 Vityaz in Russian Air Defense
OE Watch Commentary: In terms of organization,
The Russian Federation’s air defense system is primarily
split between the Ground Forces and the Aerospace
Defense Forces (VKS). The air defense systems of
the Ground Forces are generally designed to provide
air defense for the footprints of the echelons to which
they are assigned or attached. At the brigade/division
level, these may include systems such as the 9K310 Igla
(SA-18 Grouse), ZSU-23-4M4 Shilka, 9K35 Strela-10
(SA-13 Gopher), 2K22 Tunguska (SA-19 Grison), 9K33
Osa (SA-8 Gecko), 9K330 Tor (SA-15 Gauntlet). At
the Combined Arms Army/Tank Army/Army Corpslevel, air defense is provided by systems such as the
9K37 Buk (SA-11 Gadfly). At the Military District/
Joint Strategic Command-level, there are S-300V4 (SA23 Gladiator\Giant) units that are taskable air defense
assets that provide primarily ballistic missile defense
for a given area or Combined Arms Army/Tank Army/
Army Corps.

50P6E TEL for S-350 Vityaz system.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2019-Static-part-3/i-9SZqhR3/A, CC BY-NC-ND-4.0

The Aerospace Defense Forces (VKS) are responsible for national air defense, the first line of which is fighter aviation (Su-27s, Su-30s, Su-35s,
Mig-29s, etc.), and then wide area air defense systems such as the S-300PM/PM2 Favorit (SA-10d/e), S-400 Triumf (SA-21 Growler), and the
forthcoming S-500 Prometey. The VKS also operate point defense systems, such as the Pantsir-S1 (SA-22 Greyhound), to defend the aforementioned
wide area air defense systems, and other strategically valuable targets. In addition, the VKS have a few Ground Forces systems including the 9K37
Buk (SA-11 Gadfly), and S-300V4 (SA-23 Gladiator\Giant). Whether in the Ground Forces or VKS, newer and older variants of these systems may
be encountered as the Russian modernization process does not require the upgrade of all systems to a given standard, so it is not uncommon to see
several variants of a given weapon system in the Russian inventory at any given time.
In terms of range, Russian air defense systems are classified as ‘close range (up to 10 km),’ ‘short range (up to 30 km),’ ‘medium range (up to
100 km),’ and ‘long range (over 100 km).’ Close range systems include those such as the 9K310 Igla (SA-18 Grouse), ZSU-23-4M4 Shilka, 9K35
Strela-10 (SA-13 Gopher). Short range systems include the 2K22 Tunguska (SA-19 Grison), 9K33 Osa (SA-8 Gecko), and 9K330 Tor (SA-15
Gauntlet). Medium range systems include the 9K37 Buk (SA-11 Gadfly), and long range systems include the S-300V4 (SA-23 Gladiator\Giant),
S-300PM/PM2 Favorit (SA-10d/e), S-400 Triumf (SA-21 Growler), and the forthcoming S-500 Prometey. (Although the S-400 and S-500 have
advertised ranges of up to 400km, it is likely that a hit at this range would require ideal conditions.)
The accompanying excerpted article from TASS explains that the new S-350 Vityaz air defense system will be fully integrated with the S-400
and air defense network as a whole. And since the S-350 fires three types of missiles (9M96E2 (120km), 9M96E (60km), and 9M100 (10km)), it
will provide good coverage of the close, short, and medium ranges, filling the niche of several other air defense systems in the inventory, and at
a reportedly very reasonable price. As the article notes, “the [S-350 “Vityaz” Air Defense Missile System] mobile launcher with 12 missiles is
capable of easily shooting down an unmanned aerial vehicle, an aircraft, a helicopter, or a cruise missile. The “Vityaz” systems will become a
deterrent factor in the region.” End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“It is also important that one can deploy our “Triumf”, “Buk”, “Tor”,

“Pantsir”, “Vityaz”, and “Derivatsiya” systems not only on various chassis
but also on ships. In the process, all of these systems become interbranch
while adding additional equipment. Furthermore, they can operate in a single
combat command and control system.”

OE Watch | March 2020

3

EURASIA
Continued: The Role of the S-350 Vityaz in Russian Air
Defense
“[The] S-400 complex can not only use “foreign” commands for the guidance

of its missiles but is itself capable of commanding and controlling a network of
S-300s, “Pantsirs”, “Tors”, and other air defense missile systems, having merged
under its foundation dozens of launchers with hundreds of missiles. All of this
makes our complexes not simply launchers with missiles but “blocks” in a single
global airspace monitoring system, of which foreign developers essentially cannot
boast for the time being”

Source: Dmitriy Litovkin, “‘Витязи’ воздушной обороны: Чем не могут похвастаться зарубежные разработчики системы ПВО (The
‘Vitiyazi’ of Air Defense: What Foreign Air Defense System Developers Can’t Boast),” TASS Online, 23 January 2020. https://tass.ru/
opinions/7588391
The ‘Vitiyazi’ of Air Defense: What Foreign Air Defense System Developers Can’t Boast
The S-350 “Vityaz” Air Defense Missile System (ZRS) is going on combat alert in the Leningrad Oblast. The mobile launcher with 12 missiles is capable
of easily shooting down an unmanned aerial vehicle, an aircraft, a helicopter, or a cruise missile. The “Vityaz” systems will become a deterrent factor in
the region – now not a single aircraft will be able to remain unnoticed for the Russian Air Defense (PVO) forces. Furthermore, one can assume that the
coverage of the “Iskander-M” operational-tactical missile complexes will become the air defense missile system’s duty…
The S-400 Triumf can combat such difficult targets as the AWACS early radar warning aircraft and the E-8 JSTARS ground forces command and
control and surveillance aircraft. The latter provides not only reconnaissance but also the guidance of precision-guided weapon systems. Therefore, it is
considered to be one of the main targets for the PVO systems.
In comparison with the “Triumf”, the S-350 is, of course, a “small” system. They developed it as the replacement for the S-300PS air defense missile
complexes, which were accepted into the inventory at the beginning of the 1980s and they had completely exhausted their potential by 2010. The
development of this complex was caused by the analysis of the experience of the combat employment of the Air Defense Missile Troops in Vietnam and in
the Middle East, where their mobility and capability to move out from under a strike “right under the enemy’s nose”, and to rapidly prepare for combat at
a new launch position facilitated their survival to a significant extent.
In this background, the S-300PS’s “successor” is the absolute hero: First of all, the “Vityaz” has a smaller size and, second, carries 12 versus four
missiles at the same time, and is set up for combat and is torn down in a total of five minutes. In the process, the new items permit them to combat at
ranges and distances practically within the entire range of airborne targets, just like their even older comrades. Aerospace Forces Air Defense Missile
Troops Deputy Chief Colonel Yuriy Muravkin in a Krasnaya Zvezda Newspaper interview reported that the VKS border and coastal air defense regiments
will be the first to obtain the S-350. From which one can arrive at the conclusion that the “Vityaz” will become an operational system of coverage on
possible axes of a strike already prior to when the “Triumf” will become involved in this mission.
It is also important that one can deploy our “Triumf”, “Buk”, “Tor”, “Pantsir”, “Vityaz”, and “Derivatsiya” systems not only on various chassis but
also on ships. In the process, all of these systems become interbranch while adding additional equipment. Furthermore, they can operate in a single
combat command and control system. In the designers’ words, the S-400 can be used as a target designator not only using its own radar but also while
receiving information from without: from the Air Defense and Missile Defense command and control posts, for example, such as satellites and early radar
warning aircraft of the latest “Rezonans-N” radars.
The technical capabilities of this radar permit the detection and issuance of target designations on aerodynamic airborne targets at ranges of up
to 600 kilometers, and against ballistic targets – up to 1,200 kilometers. Ministry of Defense spokesmen point out that in conditions of electronic
countermeasures and natural interference, it can detect ballistic objects of any complexity, and also cruise missiles, hypersonic targets and aircraft, which
were developed based on “Stealth” technology. In so doing, any S-400 complex can not only use “ foreign” commands for the guidance of its missiles
but is itself capable of commanding and controlling a network of S-300s, “Pantsirs”, “Tors”, and other air defense missile systems, having merged under
its foundation dozens of launchers with hundreds of missiles. All of this makes our complexes not simply launchers with missiles but “blocks” in a single
global airspace monitoring system, of which foreign developers essentially cannot boast for the time being.

OE Watch | March 2020

4

EURASIA
Russia’s Increasing Bridging Capabilities: Military and
Civil Motives
OE Watch Commentary: The wide plains of Russia with wide rivers
prone to overflowing their banks, have made wet gap crossing a high
priority for the Russian military for both military and civil reasons. The
Russian military routinely practices wet gap crossings, such as in the
recent Tsentr-2019 exercises that featured a 2.8 km wet gap crossing,
conducted by six pontoon bridge/ferry systems and 14 PTS-2 tracked
amphibious transports. This force permitted the crossing of more than
300 motor vehicles per hour.
In addition to purely military activities, this capability also supports the
Engineer and Railroad Troops in actively engaging in humanitarian relief
activities. For example, last summer, large scale flooding isolated the city
of Tulun in the Irkutsk Oblast, and the military supplied the population
and rescuers with foodstuffs, medications, drinking water and other
necessary materials. They were also involved with clearing obstructions,
placing culverts, and the restoration of dams and roads.

Ferry Operations.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, https://function.mil.ru/function/mto/news/more.htm?id=12249839@egNews ,
CC BY 4.0

One of the most high-profiled Russian bridging efforts occurred not in
Russia, but in Syria in 2019. In about two days, a joint Russian-Syrian force erected a 210-meter long bridge across the Euphrates River, near
Deir ez-Zor in northeastern Syria, capable of servicing 8,000 cars a day. The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestia explains that Russia
is procuring a new pontoon bridge/ferry system capable of transporting 120 tons, or about 40 motor vehicles, or a tank and several BTRs and/
or BMPs a day. The second excerpted article, from Krasnaya Zvezda, discusses the importance of a relatively new engineer/bridge unit in the
Northern Fleet. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“It is easy to destroy bridges using precision-guided weapons, which
the enemy also makes the first priority. In that situation, ferries and
pontoon crossings will begin to play an important role.”
-Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin
“We erect bridges across rivers, we lay roads there, where there
aren’t any, and thereby support the efficient moment of motor and
armored vehicles to the forming up area or the conduct of the events
of combat training activity. So, one can entirely objectively assess
our unit’s tactical and strategic significance.”
-Captain Andrey Sokolov

OE Watch | March 2020

5

EURASIA
Continued: Russia’s Increasing Bridging Capabilities:
Military and Civil Motives

Ferry Operations.

Source: Russian Ministry of Defense, https://function.mil.ru/function/mto/news/more.htm?id=12249839@egNews ,
CC BY 4.0

Source: Aleksey Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy, “С тяжелым паром: новый транспорт переправит танки при любой погоде (With a Heavy
Ferry: The New Transport Will Ferry Tanks Across in Any Weather),” Izvestia Online, 3 February 2020. https://iz.ru/966756/aleksei-rammbogdan-stepovoi/s-tiazhelym-parom-novyi-transport-perepravit-tanki-pri-liuboi-pogode
With a Heavy Ferry: The New Transport Will Ferry Tanks Across in Any Weather
In the foreseeable future, the Ministry of Defense will be able to count on the assistance of “unsinkable rescuers” to transport equipment
and to eliminate the aftermath of catastrophes and emergency situations. Military personnel will use super-heavy ferries for these purposes.
The innovation, which will arrive in the Engineer and Railroad Troops, will be able to transport armored vehicles weighing tens of tonnes,
including tanks. In so doing, the waterborne platforms can handle strong winds, currents, and waves, the experts point out.
With its own weight of 720 tons, the ferry will transport up to 120 tons at one time, in other words, approximately 40 motor vehicles or a
tank and several BTRs and/or BMPs a Military Department spokesman told Izvestiya. The waterborne platform is a unique erector set.
In the travel position, its deck, which is equipped with a built-in bridge, is dismantled into several elements. There are also towing-motor
components and also several sections, from which the sides, stern, and bow portions are assembled, which are equipped with special ramps
for vehicles to drive on and drive off. All of the parts of the pontoon fleet are based on domestically manufactured all-terrain truck vehicles
– this will permit the transportation of sections even in conditions of the lack of good roads. Having arrived at the location, the ferry is
assembled directly by the personnel. Additional equipment is not required – the waterborne platform’s parts unfold themselves directly in
the water. It only remains for the personnel to secure them in the needed manner using special junction devices and arresting devices. The
dimensions of individual assemblies are calculated so that one can easily transport the ferry on railroads to long distances…
Any pontoon fleets – are the classic example of dual-use equipment, Military Expert Vladislav Shurygin is confident. “You can’t get by
without it during the course of contemporary combat operations”, the Expert told Izvestiya. “It is easy to destroy bridges using precisionguided weapons, which the enemy also makes the first priority. In that situation, ferries and pontoon crossings will begin to play an important
role – they will be used to maintain transport links at the proper level. However, one can do this covertly, for example, at night. Furthermore,
forward units will be able to use the ferries and amphibious tugs to force rivers and other water obstacles”…

OE Watch | March 2020

6

EURASIA
Continued: Russia’s Increasing Bridging Capabilities:
Military and Civil Motives

PTS-2 Tracked Amphibious Transport with a Ural-43206.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, http://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2017-Demonstration-p2/i-s4rbZ9q, CC BY NC-ND- 4.0

Source: Marina Shcherbakova, “Если пехоте не пройти (If the Infantry Can’t Pass),” Krasnaya Zvezda Online, 5 February 2020. http://
redstar.ru/esli-pehote-ne-projti
If the Infantry Can’t Pass
The Northern Fleet Bridge Company – is a comparatively young subunit, which was formed in November 2009…”It is sufficient to look at a
map of Murmansk Oblast in order to become convinced how rich the region is with rivers and lakes. The bodies of water are serious obstacles
for the movement of ground forces along the uninhabited portion of the Kola Peninsula and dictate their requirements for the organization
of the combat training of Northern Fleet servicemen. There aren’t that many alternate routes, which for example, during the course of the
conduct of an exercise impedes the deployment of troops to the needed area in the specified time. And then the Bridge Company gets involved
in the matter”, Captain Andrey Sokolov explains. “We erect bridges across rivers, we lay roads there, where there aren’t any, and thereby
support the efficient moment of motor and armored vehicles to the forming up area or the conduct of the events of combat training activity. So,
one can entirely objectively assess our unit’s tactical and strategic significance”.
The Bridge Company was involved in installing a double-track 50-meter crossing with a cargo capacity of 50 tons across the Srednyaya
River, along which the movement of military vehicles was subsequently carried out, in the special logistics support forces exercise, which was
conducted in August of last year. The erection of metal bridges takes approximately two days. The personnel’s actions are worked out until
they become second nature. Each specialist knows his direction of work.
“First of all, terrain reconnaissance occurs, we study the river, we use instruments to measure the depth and width of the channel, the speed
and direction of the current and we determine the location of the proximate erection of the bridge in accordance with the standards. Later
KamAZ vehicles, which are loaded with assembled metal sections, which consist of groups of supports, bridge spans, and spare parts, drive
up to the bank. We unload everything on the assembly ground and begin the gradual process of assembly, determine the axis, and install the
supports and the spans. This process requires the knowledge of the structures’ performance characteristics, serious attention, and physical
endurance, not to mention already observance of safety requirements”, Captain Andrey Sokolov explains.
Wooden bridges, as a rule, remain at their location after erection. They are needed in those cases when they need to equip a crossing as
soon as possible. The standard for the erection of metal bridges takes longer based upon time but, as the specialists say, it is easier to erect
them from the technological point of view – they are erected and dismantled like an erector set. The dismantlement process is no less timeconsuming and painstaking and even more energy-consuming in some places.
“As a rule, the length of the bridges that are erected by us total from 118 to 128 meters, but there was a 138-meter bridge in our experience”,
Andrey Sokolov says. This longest bridge, which was erected across the Kola River by the Bridge Company’s manpower in 2017…
The temporary crossing across the river was erected from a small highway prefabricated bridge set in several days. It was capable of
supported vehicles with a weight of up to 50 tons, which was also verified in practice: a column of six loaded KamAZ vehicles that were
escorted by two BTR-80s passed along the bridge. The total weight of the vehicles totaled more than 100 tons.
OE Watch | March 2020

7

EURASIA
Russia’s Spetsnaz to Get New “Flying Tank” Special
Operations Helicopter
OE Watch Commentary: According to the accompanying passage from Izvestia, “Russia’s Spetsnaz are to get a true ‘flying tank’ this year – a
unique combat helicopter” that will transport the ground force, engage enemy aircraft, prep the landing zone, insert the ground force and then
remain to provide immediate air cover. This heavily armed and armored ‘flying tank’ will be able to carry up to four extended-range Germes
[Hermes] missiles, up to eight supersonic Ataka missiles, or up to two tons of aviation bombs. It can even do Medevac after the fight. According
to the passage, tests of the first prototypes of the new combat transport helicopter (with the designation Mi-8AMTSh-VN) are planned for the fall
of 2020.
In discussing the new ‘flying tank,’ Colonel Valeriy Yuryev, deputy chair of the Russian Union of Paratroopers said, “The modern helicopter
should have sufficient firepower, plenty of ammunition, and good transportation performance. Desirably, it would land a team and then, while the
commandos are approaching their assigned location, start engaging targets. What we need is a kind of flying tank. That is more effective than
having infantry fighting vehicles or tanks supporting the commandos – you see the situation better from the air. But an aircraft like that needs a
fairly powerful engine.”
The article notes that the Mil plant began to develop a helicopter for the Special Operations Forces in 2017. Then, in May 2018, the military
authorized research and development on the project.
Flying a lift ship and flying a gunship are fundamentally similar, but there are also unique skills involved with each. Producing the aircraft seems
complicated enough, but providing ample proficient pilots could be the real challenge. It will require a lot of flight and simulator hours to master
all the aspects of this war bird. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The legendary Mi-8 is going to be turned into a heavily armed
and armored ‘flying tank.’ ”
Source: Anton Lavrov, Roman Kretsul, Aleksei Ramm, “Spetsnaz To Get ‘Flying Tank’ - Combat Transport Helicopter Will not Only Carry
Troops but Also Provide Supporting Fire”, Izvestia, 15 January 2020. https://iz.ru/955833/anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/voina-imi-spetcnaz-poluchit-letaiushchii-tank
Spetsnaz to get ‘Flying Tank’ - Combat Transport Helicopter will not only transport troops but also provide supporting fire
Russia’s spetsnaz are to get a true “flying tank” this year – a unique combat helicopter with the designation Mi-8AMTSh-VN. Tests are scheduled for the fall. This innovative
machine will transport spetsnaz and provide them with supporting fire. In its most heavily-armed version, it will carry up to four extended-range Germes [Hermes] missiles, up to eight
supersonic Ataka missiles, or up to two tons of aviation bombs. This payload will enable the helicopter to engage ground, maritime, and aerial targets at a range of up to 20 kilometers.
Modern avionics, electro-optical systems, radar, and thermal imagers will ensure all-weather day and night operation. Special-purpose subunits have long needed a machine like this…
Tests of the first prototypes of the new combat transport helicopter are planned for the fall of 2020. They are likely to take place at the Army Aviation Flight Personnel Combat Training
and Retraining Center at Torzhok…
In 2017, on its own initiative, the Mil plant began to develop a helicopter for the Special Operations Forces. In May 2018, the military authorized research and development on the
project under the codename Sapsan [Peregrine Falcon]. More than 800 million rubles have been earmarked for the project. The military signed a contract for the first 10 aircraft with
Mil [officially the Russian Helicopters Joint Stock Company] at the Army forum last summer.
The prototype, armed with rockets and bombs, should be completed early in 2020. A second prototype, carrying the full arsenal of guided missiles, is scheduled for delivery toward the
end of the year.
The legendary Mi-8 is going to be turned into a heavily armed and armored “flying tank.” With an increased payload, it will be noticeably heavier. Consequently, it will have a more
powerful version of the engine currently on the Mi-8AMTSh.
The Sapsan will outgun even the existing assault helicopters. “Product 305” will be one of its weapon systems. Reportedly this is the codename for the Germes-A advanced missile, with
an extended range of up to 20 kilometers. That is twice as far as any other helicopter-borne antitank guided missile currently in service with the Aerospace Forces. Fitting these weapons
to the upgraded Ka-52M and Mi-28NM helicopters is still in the planning stage.
Colonel Valeriy Yuryev, deputy chair of the Russian Union of Paratroopers, stated that a “multirole helicopter combining a wide range of combat and assault landing capabilities
is vital for special operations and spetsnaz subunits. In Afghanistan, Mi-8s would deliver troops to their destination and depart. Cover would usually be provided by a pair of Mi-24
helicopters flying a race-track pattern. The modern helicopter should have sufficient firepower, plenty of ammunition, and good transportation performance. Desirably, it would land a
team and then, while the commandos are approaching their assigned location, start engaging targets. What we need is a kind of flying tank. That is more effective than having infantry
fighting vehicles or tanks supporting the commandos – you see the situation better from the air. But an aircraft like that needs a fairly powerful engine….”
Apart from the long-range Germes, the new Sapsan will be able to use the 9M120 Ataka antitank guided missile usually found on assault helicopters, with a shaped-charge, high
explosive fragmentation, or thermobaric warhead. These have a range of about six kilometers.
Apart from guided missiles, the Mi-8AMTSh-VN will carry the standard complement of free-flight rocket pods, heavy machine guns, and underslung cannon and grenade launcher pods.
It will be able to use aviation bombs weighing from 50 to 500 kilograms [110 to 1100 pounds].
In its most heavily-armed version, the helicopter will carry up to four long-range Germes missiles, up to eight Atakas, or up to 2 tons of bombs. One option is to have mounting points
for four advanced Verba close-quarter air-to-air missiles.
The Sapsan’s cargo cabin will have quick-release detachable armor to protect against small arms fire. The serial-production Mi-8AMTSh has protection only for the pilots, rear
machine gunner, and vital systems, but in the new version the commandos will also have armor protection.
The helicopter’s ability to operate at any time of day or night and in any weather comes from the GOES-321MK advanced electro-optical surveillance station with thermal imaging.
This is currently fitted to the Mi-35 assault helicopter. The Mi-35 OPS-24N-1L target sighting system with laser missile guidance will enable the new helicopter ton use all of its
impressive complement of guided missiles.
All the electronic warfare equipment will be brought together by the IBKV-17VP onboard system. The cockpit on this modernized Mi-8, as appropriate for a modern helicopter, is fully
glazed with four large multipurpose indicator lights. The instruments have been adapted for use with night sight devices.
An L370V35MS electro-optical jamming station derived from the Vitebsk family is likely to be fitted, to protect against portable SAMs. Optional equipment includes a device to receive
and process data from drones, a radar station, and a radar detector.

OE Watch | March 2020

8

EURASIA
The 3BM44 “Lekalo” Fin-Stabilized Subcaliber Projectile
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article
from Izvestia discusses the Russian purchase of 2,000 new 3BM44
“Lekalo” [3БМ44 «Лекало»] fin-stabilized subcaliber projectiles. The
Lekalo can reportedly penetrate up to 650 mm of Rolled Homogeneous
Armor (RHA), and destroy a M1A2 Abrams at a range of 3-5 km. The
Lekalo is capable of being fired by all current Russian tanks such as
the T-72BM3, T-80BVM, and T-90M, as they all use canons derived
from the 2A46/D-81 family of 125 mm smoothbore guns. The Lekalo
will replace the 3BM42 “Mango” [3БМ42 «Манго»], Russia’s second
generation of fin-stabilized subcaliber projectiles that were fielded to
destroy tanks with multilayer composite armor that began to appear in
the 1970s-1980s. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

T-80BVM tank.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://www.vitalykuzmin.net/Military/ARMY-2018-Demonstration-part-1/i-6Rhwf22 , CC BY NC-ND-4.0

“They have begun to augment the arsenals of Russian tank crews with “super
projectiles.” Beginning this year, the Ministry of Defense is purchasing the
latest 3BM44 “Lekalo” subcaliber armor-piercing items. By the end of the
year, 2,000 of them will arrive in the troops. With those munitions, our tanks
will easily be able to destroy the most state-of-the-art armored vehicle at a
distance [ranging] from several meters to 3-5 kilometers…”

Source: Anton Lavrov, Roman Kretsul, and Aleksey Ramm, “Минобороны закупит новейшие боеприпасы «Лекало» пробьет защиту
любого современного танка (The Ministry of Defense Will Purchase the Latest Munitions: The ‘Lekalo’ Will Penetrate the Armor of Any
Modern Tank),” Izvestia Online, 17 January 2020. https://iz.ru/964201/anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul-aleksei-ramm/snariad-vne-ocherediminoborony-zakupit-noveishie-boepripasy
The Ministry of Defense Will Purchase the Latest Munitions: The ‘Lekalo’ Will Penetrate the Armor of Any Modern Tank
They have begun to augment the arsenals of Russian tank crews with “super projectiles”. Beginning this year, the Ministry of Defense is
purchasing the latest 3BM44 “Lekalo” [3БМ44 «Лекало»] subcaliber armor-piercing items. By the end of the year, 2,000 of them will arrive
in the troops. With those munitions, our tanks will easily be able to destroy the most state-of-the-art armored vehicle at a distance of from
several meters to 3-5 kilometers…
Since the 1990s, the leading Western countries have increased the thickness of the armor on their main battle tanks. Foreign work on the
modernization of the vehicles was especially stepped up after their employment in the conflicts in the Middle East. Foreign vehicles received
supplemental armor and reactive armor complexes. The efforts were focused on increasing the survivability from guided antitank missiles and
other shaped-charge munitions. Increasing the protection from subcaliber armor-piercing projectiles is a more difficult task.
“The ‘Lekalo’ is suitable for any 125-millimeter gun of all tanks that are in the inventory today. And “Lekalo” is beyond the competition
among those universal munitions”, Military Expert Aleksey Khlopotov told Izvestiya. “If its predecessor – the ‘Mango’ projectile – penetrates
520 millimeters of solid armor from a distance of two kilometers, then the indicator for the new model totals 650 millimeters. This is adequate
to destroy the American M1A2 Abrams of the state-of-the-art modifications…The use of a new high tensile core made of a tungsten alloy
permitted the increase of the “Lekalo’s” characteristics as compared to the “Mango”.
The 3BM44 that is being purchased uses a lengthened, more powerful 4Zh63 powder charge and an improved core, which also give the
munition an advantage over its predecessor…
“Uralvagonzavod” Corporation previously reported that an entire family of new munitions, which consists of an even more powerful
subcaliber armor-piercing projectile, is being developed to arm the “Armata” tanks. But due to its increased dimensions, it will be impossible
to use it in the current generation of tanks. The “Lekalo” is needed for the serious increase of the capabilities of the most mass-produced
Russian tanks, which remain the foundation of the country’s tank fleet for the time being…
Besides the T-90 and T-80, the Russian T-72 will be able to employ the new munitions. During their modernization to the T-72B3 level, the
tanks obtained an improved gun from the T-90 and a modernized automatic loader. Those changes permit them to use the purchased the
lengthened armor-piercing projectiles, while providing a significant advantage as compared to the tank’s earlier version.
OE Watch | March 2020

9

EURASIA
Russian Nuclear Submarines Testing Rockets to Fire
through Arctic Ice
OE Watch Commentary: The Russian navy’s strategic submarine force is split between the North Sea and Pacific Fleets. The North Sea Fleet
submarines can cruise beneath the pack ice to avoid detection. The problem is that strategic systems need to be able to launch on command. This
sometimes requires that the submarine surface through the pack ice to fire. If the pack ice is too thick, it could damage the submarine and prevent
the launch. To address this challenge, the Russians are developing hole-busting subsurface rockets to create a firing space of open water so that
the submarine may fire while submerged and then move back under the pack ice to escape detection and retaliation. As the excerpted passage
from Izvestia describes, “The ‘steel sharks’ will use rocket-propelled projectiles to break open Arctic ice. The rockets, which destroy pack ice,
have been developed for the latest nuclear submarines and are being tested right now. They create an ice hole, from where the submarines will be
able to conduct a strike.” Apparently, the new munitions are undergoing tests for the Russian Navy’s Project 955 “Borey” and Project 885 “Yasen”
nuclear submarines.
As the passage discusses, these special munitions support the launch of strategic missiles while submerged. This creates the advantage of being
able to avoid detection, as “satellites, aircraft, and helicopters cannot see the submarines and it is impossible to use sonar buoys to search for the
submarines based upon noise. In the Arctic, the buoys simply cannot penetrate the ice.” The article also quotes a Russian military expert as
saying that this “makes the Russian strategic missile submarines’ retaliatory strike against the aggressor country inevitable.” End OE Watch
Commentary (Grau)

“The new rockets... will significantly expand the capabilities of
Russian nuclear submarines...”
Source: Aleksei Ramm and Bogdan Stepovoy “Under the Ice Ceiling: Submarines Will Use a Rocket to Punch out an Ice Hole. The New
Munitions will destroy any Pack Ice,” Izvestia, 24 January 2020. https://iz.ru/965164/aleksei-ramm-bogdan-stepovoi/v-potolok-ledianoipodlodki-robiut-polyniu-dlia-vsplytiia-raketoi
Under the Ice Ceiling: Submarines Will Use a Rocket to Punch out an Ice Hole. The New Munitions will destroy any Pack Ice
The “steel sharks” will use rocket-propelled projectiles to break open Arctic ice. The rockets, which destroy pack ice, have been developed
for the latest nuclear submarines and are being tested right now. They create an ice hole, from where the submarines will be able to conduct
a strike. Under-ice navigation, and surfacing are the most difficult elements in the ship’s pre-launch efforts. An error during the execution
of these maneuvers could result in the boat being damaged or locked in the ice. The new rockets-”crackers” will significantly expand the
capabilities of Russian nuclear submarines...
The new munitions are undergoing tests for the Russian Navy’s Project 955 “Borey” and Project 885 “Yasen” nuclear submarines…These
unguided rocket-propelled projectiles … punch a hole through the pack ice at the required location. These special munitions support the
launch of strategic missiles while submerged and also in the surface recovery of floating rescue capsules, which the crews use for evacuation
during an accident. The submarines will will be able to fire rockets from both under-ice position and also on the surface...
The first tests of the rocket projectiles were conducted during the summer of 2014. At that time, they launched the rockets without explosives
in the warhead using only the propulsion charge. They initially considered warhead explosives superfluous…
However, Rear-Admiral Vsevolod Khmyrov, a Hero of Russia and a former Nuclear Submarine Captain, stated “All of these nuclear
submarines must operate in any situation and not depend on the conditions of the environment. Upon receipt of the command to launch, they
are obliged to execute it as soon as possible. Ice should not be an impediment. Making ice holes is a tactical technique which permits the
missile launch on time. A submarine can use the hull to punch through the ice but, in the process, risks getting damaged. Therefore, if time
permits, the missile submarines usually look for already existing ice holes or sail out beyond the edge of the ice”.
Military Expert Dmitriy Boltenkov states “Under-ice navigation in the Arctic – is a dangerous affair but it provides … undisputed
advantages. Satellites, aircraft, and helicopters cannot see the submarines and it is impossible to use sonar buoys to search for the
submarines based upon noise. In the Arctic, the buoys simply cannot penetrate the ice. For this reason, it is practically impossible to detect
a submarine under the winter ice, which makes the Russian strategic missile submarines’ retaliatory strike against the aggressor country
inevitable”….
Standard torpedoes were used to punch holes in the ice in the Soviet Navy. However, they were not as effective as expected…. Special
means were needed to do this…. A unique race, like the space race, occurred between the USSR and the US in the Arctic 60 years ago – the
two countries’ sailors strove to be the first to pass under the ice to the North Pole and to surface there. In 1962, the Soviet Submarine K-3
“Leninskiy Komsomol” was close to success. However, it didn’t manage to surface at the Pole itself due to the ice that was up to five meters
thick. The next year, the Project 627A Submarine K-181 “Kit” traveled more than 1,000 nautical miles under the winter ice and surfaced at
the North Pole on 29 September 1963. The sailors raised the state and naval flags in honor of this important event.

OE Watch | March 2020

10

EURASIA
Russian Coast Guard to Strengthen Presence in the Arctic
OE Watch Commentary: The FSB (Federal Security Service- Федеральная служба безопасности Российской Федерации) is the successor
organization to the infamous KGB of Soviet days. The border guards and coast guard are part of the FSB. FSB patrolling of Arctic waters was
limited to the time of year when their cutters could move in fairly open waters. This meant that most of the coast guard patrols centered on the
White Sea. According to the accompanying passage from the Barents Sea Independent Observer, the FSB is now getting its own icebreaker fleet,
with two icebreaking patrol vessels being constructed. As the passage notes, these new vessels will be used for “marine resource and border
protection, as well as ship escort and towing.” In addition, they “will be capable of carrying the Kalibr and Uran cruise missile systems” and
support the Northern Fleet in emergencies. The Russian Coast Guard regularly works with the Northern Fleet. The extended season for Coast
Guard patrols will support Russian efforts to improve and extend the sea traffic on the Northern Sea Route. (Also see: “Russian Coast Guard
Expanding in Arctic,” OE Watch, November 2018) End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Russian Border Guard Service, a department
under the FSB, is strengthening its presence in the icecovered waters of the Arctic. Construction of a first
icebreaking patrol vessel of Project 23550 was launched
in April 2017 and a second in November 2019.”
Source: Atle Staalesen, “FSB gets more icebreaking vessels for Arctic Patrol,” Barents Sea Independent Observer, 31 January 2020. https://
thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2020/01/fsb-gets-more-icebreaking-vessels-arctic-patrol
FSB gets more icebreaking vessels for Arctic Patrol
The Russian Border Guard Service, a department under the FSB, is strengthening its presence in the ice-covered waters of the Arctic.
Construction of a first icebreaking patrol vessel of Project 23550 was launched in April 2017 and a second in November 2019.
Both ships are built by the Admiralty Yard in St.Petersburg and due to be ready for service in late 2023 and 2024 respectively. Construction
of the second of the ships, the “Nikolay Zubov,” was launched during the visit of President Vladimir Putin to the yard last fall.
A third ship of the kind is now under planning. However, this ship is likely to be built by the nearby Vyborg Yard. A construction contract
will be signed in March and have a cost frame of 18 billion rubles (€255 million)... The ship will have ice-class Arc5 and be able to break
through up to 1.7 meters-thick ice.
The Vyborg Yard specializes in civilian ships and has reportedly never before built a naval vessel. The yard has more than 70 years of
experience … building icebreakers and various ice-class ship, as well as trawlers and oil drilling rigs.
The Russian Coast Guard will be able to use the new 114 meter-long ships for marine resource and border protection, as well as ship escort
and towing. The ships will be capable of carrying the Kalibr and Uran cruise missile systems.

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download
OE Watch | March 2020

11

EURASIA
Russia Prepares Ambitious Economic Strategy for Arctic
Region
by Sergey Sukhankin
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol: 17, Issue: 18, dated 11 February 2020.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/russia-prepares-ambitious-economic-strategy-for-arctic-region/

OE Watch Commentary: On 30 January, the Russian government approved a number of acts concerned with rendering new economic benefits
and subsidies to businesses or investors willing to engage in projects in the country’s High North. The adopted proposals were jointly prepared
by the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East. Taken together, this initiative
provides a steady foundation for the introduction of Russia’s Arctic strategy until 2035.
Russia’s Arctic strategy until 2035 is premised on the following documents: The Federal Law on a Special Economic Regime of the Arctic, The
Foundations of State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Arctic Until 2035, The Strategy on the Development of the Arctic Zone Until 2035, and
The Foundations of State Policy in the Arctic. This legal framework covers Murmansk Oblast, Chukotka, Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug and
Nenets Autonomous Okrug as well as portions of five other federal subjects—Arkhangelsk Oblast, Sakha Republic (Yakutia), Krasnoyarsk Krai,
the Republic of Karelia and the Republic of Komi.
As a means to attract foreign financial capital to the above-mentioned Arctic territories, Russia has outlined four main groups/types of projects
under consideration for various government benefits:
– The extraction of hydrocarbons located offshore, on Russia’s continental shelf, with a severance tax (imposed on the removal of natural
resources) set at 5 percent for oil and 1 percent for natural gas over the next 15 years, starting from the inception of industrial extraction. It is also
rumored that the Russian state might be willing to provide additional benefits for “surveys, assessments and exploration for hydrocarbons” in this
area;
– The extraction of hydrocarbons on the continent, with an emphasis on liquefied natural gas (LNG) and gas-chemistry (gazokhimiya). New
investors are expected to be promised a severance tax of zero percent in the next 12 years upon starting industrial extraction;
– The production of LNG (as well as other projects related to the gazokhimiya industry). Investors will have to pay the severance tax in full only
after 17 years of industrial production;
– Other projects (prospective benefits will largely depend on what will be extracted and the scope of the project). Aside from non-hydrocarbonrelated branches (including minerals), this group will include various infrastructure projects (such as seaports and pipelines).
The head of the Ministry for Development of the Russian Far East and Arctic, Alexander Kozlov (appointed in 2020), has stated that the key idea
behind the proposed benefits and stimuli for investors is premised on Moscow’s strong determination to break the post-1991 trend in the region.
Specifically, he argued that the Arctic zone, whose actual share of Russian GDP is close to 10 percent and receives 10 percent of total foreign direct
investment (FDI), suffers from chronic under-population, containing less than 1.5 percent of the total Russian population. Furthermore, he argued
that all major components of the Human Development Index (HDI), including education, healthcare, employment and economic wellbeing, are
lower in the High North than the Russian average. As a result, he stated, “For the past 15 years, the local population has decreased by 0.3 million.”
Sergey Veller, the president of the Union of Manufacturers and Entrepreneurs of Murmansk Oblast, expressed similar concern and argued that the
only way to stop further depopulation of the Russian Arctic is to increase its attractiveness through new economic opportunities and job creation.
These and other concerns are all reflected in the above-mentioned government planning documents. The main expectations pinned to the
initiative are premised on the prospect of creating over 21 new large regional mega-projects (including the Indiga Port, in Nenets Autonomous
Okrug), exploration of large deposits of platinum and other metals in Krasnoyarsk Krai and Murmansk Oblast, and the creation of a full-cycle
lumber/timber-producing complex in Arkhangelsk Oblast. These and hundreds of smaller commercial initiatives (to become fully operable within
the next 15 years) are expected to result in the creation of 200,000 additional jobs in the region and “make the Arctic attractive to Russian youth
and young specialists.”
That said, it is important to underscore that Russia’s main economic interests the Arctic region actually boil down to just two elements. First is
production of liquefied natural gas, which, “in the upcoming 15 years, could turn Russia into one of the largest players on the global LNG market.”
This will be achieved primarily through Yamal LNG (located in Sabetta, on the Yamal Peninsula) and Arctic LNG 2 (Gyda Peninsula). Second,
Russia is making huge investments in the so-called Northern Sea Route, intended not only to give Russia access to Arctic natural resources, but
also to provide a maritime corridor for Chinese goods traveling to the European Union. Russia aims to solidify its role as the main transportation
artery between the two—both on land and by sea.

(Continued)
OE Watch | March 2020

12

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Prepares Ambitious Economic
Strategy for Arctic Region
Importantly, in line with the above-mentioned legal documents and proposals, some specific suggestions have already been voiced. Namely, it has
been argued that a subsidized mortgage program (2 percent annual rate) should be created to aid all who are willing to move to the Arctic region.
Additionally, Minvostokrazvitya proposed creating a new state corporation, “Roshelf,” specifically tasked with the exploration and extraction of
hydrocarbons in the High North and the Far East. This corporation would be given exclusive rights to “represent Russia’s interests” and “exploit
[Russian] resources and grant the right to participate in projects [to] private investors.”
Two important inferences should be drawn from these developments related to the Russian Arctic. First, for the first time, an initiative of this
scope and ambition has been jointly drafted by three powerful institutions, with one of them being made directly responsible for the region.
Second, the Arctic Strategy has outlined Russia’s most important national interests in the High North. And aside from its economic aspects, this
Strategy clearly points to a necessity to defend Russian sovereignty and territorial integrity in this remote but resource-rich region. End OE Watch
Commentary (Sukhankin)

Compendium of Central Asian Military and Security Activity

By Matthew Stein
Since Central Asian states gained independence in
1991, new regional military and security alliances
have been created (some of which are Russianled), new military partnerships with non-NATO
countries have been established, a number of
joint military exercises have been conducted,
over a dozen high-profile incidents of violence
and civil unrest have taken place, and military
installations have been used by foreign
militaries. While this activity gained attention, it
has not been collectively compiled. A compilation
of this activity can serve as a guide for current and
future military and security involvement in Central
Asia.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/194880

OE Watch | March 2020

13

EURASIA
Russia, China and the Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: Just as in other countries, over the past month,
the Russian media has been filled with stories dealing with the possible spread
of the coronavirus from China. Russian concerns are well grounded. Not only
does Russia share a 2,600-mile border with China, but travel between the two
countries has increased dramatically over the past decade. Some 2.3 million
Chinese travelled to Russia in 2019, while approximately 100,000 Russians
visited China. While it is too early to determine the overall impact the
coronavirus will have on China, Russia and elsewhere, the two accompanying
excerpts provide a Russian perspective on the issue, discussing the possible
implications within the Chinese defense industry and how Russia is prepared
to defend against this virus.
The first excerpt from the Russian military weekly Voyenno-Promyshlennyy
Kuryer, describes how Chinese “authorities are seriously responding to the
threat,” and how they “have thrown significant medical forces into the fight President Putin meets with Russian health officials to discuss measures to counter
against it.” The author asserts that this virus will affect “the 11 million residents
the spread of coronavirus in Russia, 29 January 2020.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/62691, CCA 4.0 Intl
of Wuhan,” which is “China’s largest industrial center” and where, because
of the virus, “many enterprises are shutting down.” The author points out that the affected “province is one of the main clusters of the defense
industry of China,” which produce many necessary “electronics and components for military equipment, in particular radars and software.” As the
title of the article suggests, the author posits that this virus will have a negative impact on China’s “many defense industries.”
The second excerpt from the centrist Nezavisimaya Gazeta notes that Russians have started being evacuated from China “by planes of the
Aerospace Forces (VKS) of Russia.... by order of the President.” As such, it concludes that “the problem of combating the deadly virus is seen
in the Kremlin almost as a combat mission.” It describes how this virus could affect Russia, pointing out that some are comparing it with “the
Spanish flu pandemic” which a century ago “devastated the world’s population by at least 50 million people.” The author remarks that today,
such losses would amount to “a third of the population of the Russian Federation.” Fortunately, “there is no panic about this yet,” because Russia
possesses “quite strong military medicine,” …and “the Russian army has experience in combating especially dangerous infections.” The article
describes how “in the summer of 2016, in the fight against the anthrax epidemic on the Yamal Peninsula, the RKhBZ [Radiological, Chemical,
and Biological Defense Troops] took part. In 2012, they fought anthrax in the Altai Territory.”
Politically, economically and militarily, relations today between Russia and China are strong. However, should the coronavirus spread widely
from China into Russia, these relations will likely undergo a special test. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“…In Russia, there is no panic about this yet. This is due to the fact that,

in the country after the collapse of the USSR, there remained quite strong
military medicine…”
Source: Maxim Kazanin, “Коронавирус поразил китайские ракеты (Coronavirus hit Chinese missiles),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 4
February 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/55015
A new type of pneumonia caused by the 2019-nCoV coronavirus has begun to gain strength in the city of Wuhan, Hubei Province. The authorities are seriously responding to the threat
and have thrown significant medical forces into the fight against it - doctors from all provinces are sent to the focus of infection by civilian aircraft. According to open data, 6200 doctors
are involved. According to official reports of the Ministry of Defense of the PRC, 450 military doctors also work in Wuhan. It is likely that the medical contingent will increase.
Chinese and foreign companies are among the eleven million Wuhan, China’s largest industrial center, are shutting down enterprises. Hubei Province is one of the main clusters of
the defense industry of China. Here are several key research departments of CETC Corporation (China Electronics Technology Group Corporation), which produce electronics and
components for military equipment, in particular radars and software, the 710th and 729th research and development institutes of the China Shipbuilding Industrial Corporation, and
other large defense industry organizations. In neighboring cities, there are enterprises of the rocket and space industry, which produce CR, ASR, and LV.
The logical question is: how will the defense industry complex of Wuhan work, where there are many defense industries, since the city is closed and there is no need to deliver
components or send finished products. It’s difficult to answer from the start - transport options are either closed or seriously limited.

Source: Vladimir Mukhin, “Российскую армию бросили на борьбу с коронавирусом (Russian army thrown to fight against coronavirus),”
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 2 February 2020. http://www.ng.ru/politics/2020-02-02/1_7783_medicine.html
…On Monday, the evacuation of Russians from China by planes of the Aerospace Forces (VKS) of Russia begins. According to the press secretary of the President of the Russian
Federation Dmitry Peskov, this is done “by order of the president” for the delivery of “Russian citizens from areas of China most affected by the coronavirus” to their homeland. The
phrase “by order” is noteworthy. So, there is reason to believe that the problem of combating the deadly virus is seen in the Kremlin almost as a combat mission.
…The possible spread of the coronavirus type 2019-nCoV in Russia is compared by the media with the Spanish flu pandemic. This type of flu in 1918-1919 devastated the world’s
population by at least 50 million people. For comparison: this is a third of the population of the Russian Federation….
…In Russia, there is no panic about this yet. This is due to the fact that in the country after the collapse of the USSR, there remained quite strong military medicine, as well as radiation,
chemical and biological defense troops (RBM), which are able to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), including biological.
…As NG has already written… the Russian army has experience in combating especially dangerous infections. So, in the summer of 2016, in the fight against the anthrax epidemic on
the Yamal Peninsula, the RKhBZ troops took part. In 2012, they fought anthrax in the Altai Territory.

OE Watch | March 2020

14

EURASIA
Russia to Provide Special Legal Status for ERA
Technopolis
OE Watch Commentary: According to its official website, Russia’s ERA
Military Innovation Technopolis is officially up and running (https://www.
era-tehnopolis.ru/). As previously reported (“Update on Technopolis-ERA,”
OE Watch, September 2019), this new technical complex revolves around the
concept of merging talented, young military scientists with their counterparts
from academia and industry. By providing them with top-notch research
facilities, the goal is to harness their intellectual prowess and creativity to
develop cutting-edge technologies to strengthen the country’s defense and
high-tech potential.

One can imagine the uncertainty surrounding the patent rights and
ownership of products jointly developed by individuals working for the state,
military and private industry. The brief excerpt from Nezavisamoye Voennoye
Obozreniye, describes a recent meeting among ERA officials where they
Vladimir Putin visited ERA Military Innovation Technopark, November 2018.
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/59179, CC by SA 4.0
discussed “developing a law on the legal status of participants in the military
innovation technopolis.” The article quotes an ERA official who suggests that the proposed “law will be called upon to provide unhindered access
to scientific and innovative infrastructure, as well as to the results of scientific.... and technical activities created with raising budget funds.” This
may be an indirect reference as to how state, military and private companies will share both in the investment and possible profits from products
developed in this joint venture. The proposed law also “provides for special legal regulation of relations between governing bodies and participants
at the technopolis during their performance of scientific, ... technical and innovative activities.”
When the ERA technopolis was still being constructed, skeptical Russian observers questioned whether private technology companies would
want to get involved when it wasn’t entirely clear how they could protect their investments. This article suggests that these types of worries are
now being addressed. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Era has created 18 research laboratories in Technopolis.
They are equipped with advanced equipment that allows for
research in eight scientific areas.”
Source: “Минобороны РФ хочет наделить особым правовым статусом участников технополиса Эра (The Ministry of Defense of the
Russian Federation wants to confer special legal status on the Era technopolis),” Nezavisamoye Voennoye Obozreniye, 7 February 2020. http://
nvo.ng.ru/nvoevents/2020-02-07/100_200207news2.html
The Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation is developing a law on the legal status of participants in the military innovation
technopolis “Era,” thanks to which it plans to create promising conditions for the work of private and state enterprises. This was announced
on Friday by Major General Andrei Goncharov, head of the Main Department for Research and Technological Support of Advanced
Technologies of the Ministry of Defense, during a meeting of the Era Council.
“The law will be called upon to provide unhindered access to scientific and innovative infrastructure, as well as to the results of scientific,
scientific and technical activities created with raising budget funds,” Goncharov said.
…The draft law was developed by a working group with the participation of the Ministry of Defense and other interested departments and
organizations. Its text is currently undergoing interdepartmental coordination; it is planned to submit a draft document to the government in
November 2020.
The draft law provides for special legal regulation of relations between governing bodies and participants in a technopolis during their
performance of scientific, scientific, technical and innovative activities. In addition, it regulates the activities of state authorities in the
territory of the technopolis….
Era has created 18 research laboratories in Technopolis. They are equipped with advanced equipment that allows for research in eight
scientific areas. These are robotics, information security, IT systems and automated control systems, energy supply technologies, technical
vision, computer science and computer engineering, biotechnological systems and technologies, nanotechnologies and nanomaterials.

OE Watch | March 2020

15

EURASIA
Military Perspectives and Some Critique on Russia’s New
Government and Economy

OE Watch Commentary: The big news in Russia over the past month were the changes in government and a proposed plan to amend the
country’s constitution. Given that the Medvedev government had become quite unpopular, there are now hopes that a new prime minister and
other key ministers will be able to jumpstart the economy. The excerpted passages from two recent articles in the military weekly VoyennoPromyshlennyy Kuryer (VPK), shed some light on how those in uniform assess these personnel adjustments and the country’s economic situation.
The first article insists that trends in the Russian economy, outside of the “few ‘advanced’ regions like Moscow… are close to catastrophic.”
The author points out that “it is only thanks to the rich and super-rich residents of Moscow and million-plus cities,” which help to level out the
average falling household incomes. To correct this imbalance, the author advocates “forced industrialization of the country and the introduction of
a progressive taxation scale” which will allow the state “to gently redistribute income from rich and super-rich people in favor of the bulk of fellow
citizens.” The article ominously concludes that “the economy is rapidly transforming into politics, and if we do not create new national industries,”
and change the tax structure, “the situation in the country will be destabilized.”
The second article is by the popular military journalist, Victor Baranets, who begins by praising the Defense Minister for retaining his position
in the new government and for having helped the Russian armed forces reach the goal of “70 percent in terms of new weapons.” He then offers
a challenge to the new government, hoping that it will be able to “solve the most important social (pension) problem of the military. And finally
end the damned reduction factor (54%).” Baranetz is referring to a 2012 law which pegged military pensions at 54% of their value. While there
have been modest increases over the past 8 years, they have hardly kept up with inflation. Baranets concludes with a “demand,’ stating that the
government must “stop this mockery of servicemen who put their health on the line in defense of the Fatherland.”
Over the past decade, the current Kremlin leadership has placed military modernization and improved combat readiness as key objectives. To
reach these ambitious goals, they have squeezed other domestic social programs, to include military pensions. These articles suggest that those in
uniform (particularly retirees) hope that this change in key government personnel will signal a change in the Kremlin’s spending priorities. End
OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“… I, who belong to the military class, am extremely
interested to find out how he and the government will solve the
most important social (pension) problem of the military….”
Source: Yuri Krupnov, Кабинет освободили от плохих танцоров. Что дальше? (The cabinet was freed from bad dancers. What’s next?),”
Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 28 January 2020. vpk-news.ru/articles/54912
Changing the economic course is not part of the tasks of the new government formed by Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin. However, he has to solve several serious
problems, and if this is not done, it is pointless to talk about a breakthrough in the country’s development.
The point is that today the economy, even in a few “advanced” regions like Moscow, is stagnating, and even in the Far East and in the Non-Chernozem Region — our
fundamental macro-regions, trends are close to catastrophic.
Obviously, household incomes are really falling. And if in the whole country, according to statistics, they keep, relatively speaking, at zero, it is only thanks to the rich
and super-rich residents of Moscow and million-plus cities. That is, they show us the “average temperature in the hospital.” In other regions of Russia, people vote with
their feet - they leave their native places of residence in large cities or for permanent residence abroad….
To solve the problem, in my opinion, there are only two interconnected instruments: forced industrialization of the country and the introduction of a progressive
taxation scale that will allow you to gently redistribute income from rich and super-rich people in favor of the bulk of fellow citizens. Obviously, the government of
Dmitry Medvedev could not cope with the solution of the problem….
…This is the initial logic, and the sooner everyone understands and assimilates it, the sooner not only the economy will change for the better, but also the general
political situation. Before our very eyes, the economy is rapidly transforming into politics, and if we do not create new national industries, the situation in the country
will be destabilized.

Source: Victor Baranets, “Хорошая связка для нового оружия (A good bundle for new weapons),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, 28
January 2020. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/54909
When the cabinet was changed, the power block remained virtually the same. It was expected. Why?
Without creating security on the external side of the country, it is impossible to calmly engage in the economy within it. It is quite obvious that under the Minister
of Defense Sergey Shoigu, the army has significantly changed for the better. But the reforms in the Armed Forces have not ended, they are continuing. Sergey
Kuzhugetovich has a lot of ambitious and correct plans. Therefore, to remove him, as well as other well-established security officials, from work in this strategic
direction would be inappropriate.
Unlike Anatoly Serdyukov’s predecessor, Sergei Shoigu managed to establish an excellent interaction between the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation and
the military-industrial complex, and ended the confusion in pricing for military products…. Recall: when Sergei Shoigu came to the Ministry of Defense, we had only 1015 percent of new weapons. And today, we have reached 70 percent in terms of this indicator….
[The new Prime Minister] Mishustin said that the phrase “No money” will never be heard again. If so, then I, who belong to the military class, am extremely interested
to find out how he and the government will solve the most important social (pension) problem of the military. And when in the end the damned reduction factor (54%)
will be canceled….
…So here you are, dear gentlemen, the first request from the army and even our demand: stop this mockery of servicemen who put their health on the line in defense of
the Fatherland.

OE Watch | March 2020

16

EURASIA
Letters to Great-Grandfathers at the Front: Developing
Military Patriotism in Russian Society
OE Watch Commentary: The current Kremlin leadership
continues to maintain a wide-ranging, multi-dimensional
project to honor the tremendous sacrifices in the country’s
victory in the Great Patriotic War (WW II). They are
particularly focusing on the younger generation by funding
youth groups like Yunarmiya (Young Army) and sponsoring
new films and television series about the war.
Russian schools are also doing their share. According to
a January article in the pro-Kremlin publication Izvestia,
Moscow high school students are writing “Letters to
Great Grandfathers on the Front.” These letters are being
written in “open lessons,” meaning they are open to parents,
administrators, and government officials in conjunction with
preparations for the 75-year Anniversary of Victory Day
(9 May). The article quotes a Moscow official who explains
that these letters “can be published on the mass federal
project, ‘Letters of Victory’ if they are uploaded with
scanned letters and photos from family archives attached.”

Soldiers marching in the 2019 Victory Day parade.

Source: Mil.ru via Wikimedia, commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Moscow_Victory_Day_Parade_(2019)_35.jpg CCA 4.0 intl

The article describes how the “Letters of Victory” portal publishes letters from “soldiers and officers, workers in the rear, orderlies and doctors,
military war journalists and other participants in The Great Patriotic War.” Since the portal was launched on 3 December 2019, over 200,000
letters have been uploaded, and the plan is to gather a million. The article asserts, “these living testimonies of the participants will allow us to see
and understand all the devastating disasters of the war through the eyes of a variety of people who turned out to be its victims, heroes and victors.”
This is important in the context of the development of contemporary military patriotism in Russian society. End OE Watch Commentary (Byrne)

“…Moscow high school students are writing “Letters to

Great-Grandfathers on the Front” in association with the 75year anniversary of Victory…”

Source: “Московские школьники напишут «письма прадеду на фронт (Students Will Write “Letters to my Great-grandfather on the Front”
for the 75-year Anniversary of Victory Day),” Izvestia, 20 January 2020. https://iz.ru/966379/2020-01-20/moskovskie-shkolniki-napishutpisma-pradedu-na-front-k-75-letiiu-pobedy
High school students in Moscow schools will write “letters to their great-grandfather at the front” in an open lesson dedicated to the 75th
anniversary of the Victory.
Ivan Shubin, the head of the capital’s department of media and advertising, described the project... Each student, if desired, will be able to
share his letter with the rest by publishing it on the portal of the large-scale federal project, “Letters of Victory.” To do this, you will need to
scan it and attach a photo from the family archive.
According to Shubin, the portal publishes letters from soldiers and officers, home front workers, nurses and doctors, military journalists and
other participants of the Great Patriotic War.
The official noted that since the launch of the project on December 3, 2019, more than 200 thousand letters have already been published. In
total, it is planned to collect up to 1 million documents.
“These living testimonies of the participants will allow us to see and understand all the devastating disasters of the war through the eyes of a
variety of people who turned out to be its victims, heroes and victors,” said Shubin….

OE Watch | March 2020

17

EURASIA
“Borderization” Continues in Georgia
OE Watch Commentary: In August 2019, the Georgian government
established a police checkpoint near the village of Chorchana as part of
an effort to counter what it has called the “borderization” of its territory
by forces from the occupied region of South Ossetia (see: “A Change in
the ‘Borderization’ Process for Georgia?” OE Watch, October 2019). The
checkpoint initially appeared to have some effect and helped the Georgian
government with public relations at a time when many in the country did
not believe enough was being done to counter “borderization.” As the
accompanying excerpted articles report, Georgia’s border with the occupied
South Ossetia region continues to shift and the reported incidents provide an
update on how this is taking place.
The articles, from Georgia’s English-language news website Civil.ge,
report on two recent incidents in which occupying forces erected “illegal
A Georgian villager is left beyond the barbwire installed by the Russian troops
the South Ossetia-Georgia contact line in September 2013.
installations” on Georgian government controlled territory. The first incident Source: VOA viaalong
Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Barbwires_in_South_Ossetia,_Georgia._September_2013.jpg,
Public domain
took place on 14 January near the village of Chorchana of the Khashuri
Municipality, at the dividing line with the Tskhinvali Region. The second incident took place on 20 January in the village of Gugutiantkari of
the Gori Municipality. The villages of Chorchana and Gugutiantkari are in two different districts that do not border each other, but are notable
since both made headlines in August 2019 – Chorchana because of the police checkpoint and Gugutiantkari since part of it became divided after
occupation forces installed fencing. There is no mention of how far away the “illegal installations” are from the police checkpoint at Chorchana.
The first article reports on the “illegal installations” near Chorchana without specifying the type of barrier. The second article on the report of
borderization in Gugutiantkari includes a statement from Georgia’s State Security Service that “barbed wires are being replaced with so-called
border fencing.” The second article also mentions that the State Security Service is reacting to the situation “without specifying the measures
taken.” While it is unknown what measures the Georgian government might take in response to the latest incidents, the articles show that
borderization continues despite previous efforts to counter it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“Barbed wires are being replaced with so-called border fencing, which
is... part of [the] so-called ‘borderization’ [process].”
Source: “Security Service Reports on Illegal ‘Borderization’ on Tbilisi-Controlled Territory,” Civil.ge, 14 January 2020. https://civil.ge/
archives/334487
The State Security Service of Georgia (SSG) informed Civil.ge today that the occupying forces erected “illegal installations” on Tbilisi-controlled
territory near Chorchana village of Khashuri Municipality, at the dividing line with Tskhinvali Region…
“The issue of provocative actions of the occupying forces in the forest near the villages of Chorchana and Tsaghvli of Khashuri Municipality has
been strongly put forward both at the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism (IPRM) meetings, as well as the rounds of Geneva International
Discussions (GIDs),” the Security Service added…
In September, amid increasing tensions over the Georgian police checkpoint, occupation forces erected signs to mark “the border” in the ChorchanaTsnelisi area. The EU monitors then confirmed that these pushed the line of occupation 1.3 kilometres into the Tbilisi-administered area.

Source: “Georgia Security Service: Occupying Forces Continue Fencing on Tbilisi-Controlled Territory,” Civil.ge, 21 January 2020. https://
civil.ge/archives/335173
The State Security Service of Georgia (SSG) informed Civil Georgia (Civil.ge) on January 20 that the forces of Russian occupation “continue
provocative actions” along the dividing line between Tskhinvali Region/South Ossetia and Georgia proper.
According to the SSG, “they have erected illegal installations on the Georgian central government-controlled territory in Gugutiantkari village of Gori
Municipality.”
“Barbed wires are being replaced with so-called border fencing, which is the part of so-called ‘borderization’ [process],” the SSG said.
…A day earlier, on January 19, Davit Katsarava, leader of the “Strength in Unity” anti-occupation vigilante group, spread reports via his Facebook
page, saying that occupying forces have marked trees across Chorchana-Perevi area – allegedly readying for another round of “borderization”
activities…Katsarava further claimed that occupying forces moved the dividing line few hundreds meters deeper into Tbilisi-administered territory near
the village of Perevi in Sachkhere Municipality.
The SSG told Civil.ge that they are now “thoroughly inspecting” the mentioned area, and noted that the Government “is reacting adequately to illegal
markings and each alleged case of ‘borderization’”, without specifying the measures taken.

OE Watch | March 2020

18

EURASIA
A Resolution to Kyrgyz-Tajik Border Problems?
OE Watch Commentary: A number of violent incidents
have taken place on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border near Tajikistan’s
exclave of Vorukh over the past several years, including
two recent ones in December 2019 and January 2020. As
the accompanying excerpted article reports, the most recent
incidents appear to have pushed the governments into taking
action. Following the latest conflict, official delegations from
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan held negotiations to fully demarcate
their borders and reduce the violence.
The article, from Tajikistan’s Asia-Plus, reports that the
Kyrgyz government “offered Tajikistan an exchange of two
sections of the border – these sections are Aryk-Asty of the
Ak-Sai village, Batken District, and Samarkandyk, in the
Enclaves in Kyrgyzstan.
village of Samarkandyk.” The article also mentions the efforts
Source: Enclaves_in_Kyrgyzstan_RU.svg via Wikimedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Enclaves_in_Kyrgyzstan_EN.png, CC BY-SA 3.0
of a working group, which used “134 topographical maps” and
“looked at 120 kilometers of the border and came to the conclusion that 114 kilometers are the same in all the maps.” The article does not mention
it, but both governments requested maps from Soviet era archives in Moscow a few years ago and the large number of maps used by the working
group could have come from that collection. The article also mentions that “only 60 percent” of the Kyrgyz-Tajik border is demarcated and there
are “around 70 sections that are not specified, on which there are several settlements.”
The article also reports on the creation of “the topographical working group of the Kyrgyz Republic,” which worked out the “exchange of land
with Tajikistan.” Lastly, Kyrgyzstan’s Deputy Prime Minister stated that “consultations will be carried out with each resident who lives on these
sites” before an official exchange of land takes place. He also mentioned that “there will be no exchange if there is no consent of local resident.”
While it could be a few months until the Kyrgyz government finalizes a decision on whether or not to exchange the two sections of the border, the
most recent incidents might be the catalyst for the Kyrgyz and Tajik governments to finally demarcate sections of the border around Vorukh. End
OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“The working groups looked at 120 kilometers of the
border and came to the conclusion that 114 kilometers
are the same in all the maps.”
Source: “Кыргызстан назвал два села, территорией которых поменяется с Таджикистаном (Kyrgyzstan named two villages, of which
whose territory will be exchanged with Tajikistan),” Asia-Plus, 21 January 2020. https://asiaplustj.info/ru/news/tajikistan/politics/20200121/
kirgizstan-nazval-dva-sela-territoriei-kotorih-pomenyaetsya-s-tadzhikistanom
Kyrgyzstan offered Tajikistan an exchange of two sections of the border – these sections are Aryk-Asty of the Ak-Sai village, Batken District,
and Samarkandyk, in the village of Samarkandyk. Deputy Prime Minister Zhenish Razakov announced this on January 21 at a meeting of the
parliamentary committee on international affairs, defense and security…
Based on the results of 6 previous meetings, 134 topographical maps were prepared. The working groups looked at 120 kilometers of the
border and came to the conclusion that 114 kilometers are the same in all the maps.
The length of the Kyrgyz-Tajik border is more than 970 km, only 60 percent of which is demarcated. Between the two countries, there
remains around 70 sections that are not specified, on which there are several settlements. An undefined border causes conflicts in these border
settlements – because of land, water and illegal border crossing issues.
Following the latest conflict, official delegations from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan held negotiations, after which a protocol was adopted. On
January 15, of the points of the protocol started work – the topographical working group of the Kyrgyz Republic started to work out issues on
the exchange of land with Tajikistan. The delegations agreed to identify areas of the border and prepare a proposal by March 1, 2020…
The deputy prime minister said that prior to the exchange, consultations will be carried out with each resident who lives on these sites…
“There will be no exchange if there is no consent of local residents,” he added…

OE Watch | March 2020

19

EURASIA
The Geopolitics of TurkStream and the Complexities of
Bulgaria’s Foreign Policy
OE Watch Commentary: The January 2020 launching
of the TurkStream natural gas dual pipeline (one for the
Turkish market and the second to continue overland to
SE Europe) not only streamlines the shipment of fuel to
regional customers, such as NATO ally Bulgaria, but also
has significant geopolitical implications. For Russia, it
represents an important step in its continuing efforts to
bypass Ukrainian territory in the provision of natural gas
for its other European customers. Russia has long sought
to bypass Ukrainian territory in this regard, increasing
Moscow’s leverage over Kyiv. As the first accompanying
article from Bulgarian newspaper Dnevnik notes, not
only will Ukraine make far less money from transit fees,
but Russia will be able to selectively limit the flow of its
natural gas to Ukraine without affecting its other European
customers. A geopolitical by-product within this context
seems to be a tightening of mutual dependence among
Russia, Turkey, and Bulgaria, as TurkStream’s second, Then-European Council President Donald Tusk and Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov, January 2018.
overland line will continue from Turkish to Bulgarian Source: EU2018BG Bulgarian Presidency via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boyko_Borissov_welcomes_Donald_Tusk_(39632855571).jpg, CC BY 2.0
territory, and then to other SE European customers.
For Bulgaria, a NATO ally and EU member state that still retains pragmatic, if not amicable relations with Moscow, the TurkStream launch
highlighted the inherent challenges in balancing western and eastern influences, as noted in the second accompanying reference. While a
straightforward desire to receive needed Russian natural gas without having to pay transit fees to Ukraine and Romania may justify this financial
decision by Bulgaria and its pro-EU governing coalition, the optics of TurkStream’s January 2020 launch ceremony, however, seemed to hint at
more than purely economic deal making: in addition to the expected participation of Russian President Putin and Turkish President Erdoğan, the
two other national-level European leaders on stage were Bulgarian Prime Minister Borisov and Serbian President Vucic. (Also see: “TurkStream’s
Role in Energy Security and Turkish-Russian Relations,” in this issue of OE Watch) End OE Watch Commentary (Sarafian)

“Regarding foreign policy, we Bulgarians have
always learned from the Byzantines... in the east
we say one thing, in the west we say another…”
“It is a ‘project with no economic sense,
but with a large political element.’”

OE Watch | March 2020

20

EURASIA
Continued: The Geopolitics of TurkStream and the
Complexities of Bulgaria’s Foreign Policy
Source: “Киев оцени на $450 млн. годишно загубите от пускането на ‘Турски поток (Kiev estimates $ 450 million annually from Turkish
Stream launch),” Dnevnik, 9 January 2020. https://www.dnevnik.bg/sviat/2020/01/09/4014280_kiev_oceni_na_450_mln_godishno_zagubite_
ot_puskaneto/
“The commissioning of the Turkish Stream gas pipeline, which bypasses Ukraine’s transmission system, will bring annual losses of up to $
450 million to the country… stated Sergey Makogon, head of GTS Operator of Ukraine [Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine LLC –
the newly formed company that operates Ukraine’s gas transmission system].”
“It is a ‘project with no economic sense, but with a large political element,’ he [Sergey Makogon] added”
“ ‘Bulgaria, Turkey and other countries in the region no longer receive gas through Ukraine,’ he [Sergey Makogon] noted”

Source: “Защо България казва едно на Русия, а друго на САЩ (Why Bulgaria says one thing to Russia and the other to the USA),”
Dnevnik, 9 January 2020. https://www.dnevnik.bg/analizi/2020/01/09/4014333_zashto_bulgariia_kazva_edno_na_rusiia_a_drugo_na_sasht/
“Regarding foreign policy, we Bulgarians have always learned from the Byzantines... in the east we say one thing, in the west we say
another…”

Source: ““Борисов е поканен на среща с Путин и Ердоган в Истанбул за откриването на ‘Турски поток (Borisov invited to meet with
Putin and Erdoğan in Istanbul to open Turkish Stream),” Dnevnik, 4 January 2020. https://www.dnevnik.bg/politika/2020/01/04/4012285_
borisov_e_pokanen_na_sreshta_s_putin_i_erdogan_v/
“The Bulgarian Prime Minister has been invited to the launching of TurkStream by President Erdogan [of Turkey].”

CLICK ON AN ISSUE TO DOWNLOAD!

OEWATCH

Check out back issues of FMSO’s
Operational Environment
Watch dating back to 2011. They
provide translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/p/oe-watch-issues
OE Watch | March 2020

21

EURASIA
Huawei in Europe: Debating Europe’s Position in a New
Technological Cold War
OE Watch Commentary: A lot has been written about
the risk to Western security if the United Kingdom moves
forward with a decision to use the Chinese technology
company Huawei for its 5G telecommunication network
infrastructure. As the first accompanying passage reports,
on 28 January, the UK government said it would also allow
a restricted role for Huawei in shaping the 5G network
in Britain. Germany and other countries have also been
grappling with the issue, concerned that banning Huawei
may add years of delays and billions in costs to their 5G
network launch. In light of these debates, the following
day, the European Commission announced that member
states should allow Huawei to operate within the bloc, “but
with strict regulations to protect national security.” As the
passage notes, “the [European] commission’s compromise
recommendation provides cover for European capitals to
resist Washington’s demands.” This represents Europe’s
challenging position in the divergence between China and
Kevin Tao, President of Huawei, Western Europe, talking about 5G; “Digitising Europe Summit”; Gasometer,
the United States on the issue of 5G.
Berlin; December 2014.

Source: Vodafone Institut via Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/vodafone-institute/15368562844, CC BY-ND 2.0

As the second passage notes, the EU “unveiled security
guidelines for ‘high-risk’ suppliers in the opening up of fifth-generation, or 5G, telecoms network across the bloc.” As the passage demonstrates,
Europe appears to be in an awkward position, stuck between making an economic decision favoring Huawei’s 5G expansion in Europe while
also trying to heed the position of the United States, which has been “lobbying allies, including those in Europe, not to use Huawei.” As the third
passage from the Barcelona Center for International Affairs (CIDOB), a leading European think-tank notes, “China’s re-emergence as a global
power divides those who perceive it as a risk from those who see it as an opportunity.... The European Union is ...[a] place divisions are opening
up over what China’s empowerment means.” The author writes that the union has “not yet defined a common position and the debate will intensify
in 2020.”
CIDOB has published several papers on the topic of a changing world order, raising the question of where Europe falls within a new and growing
geopolitical and technological battle between the US and China. As the passage discusses, 2020 will be the year of 5G, when “classical geopolitical
concepts are adapted to a competition that does not focus so much on competition for territory but for virtual spaces.” The author points out that
the main competition will be between China and the United States, causing a “resurgence of old Cold War reflexes.” He writes that one of the main
battlegrounds in 2020 will be “the extension of 5G technology, an area in which China leads. The United States leads the countries that see it as
a security threat. This technological bipolarity will create new dependencies and spheres of influence.”
As far as what can be done to reduce tensions, he notes that a “multilateral initiative to replicate in the technological field what has been done
in terms of trade, disarmament and the fight against climate change is desirable.” However, while such a global regime may take shape at some
point within this decade, he claims that in 2020, “unilateralism and competition will continue to prevail.” End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“In terms of competition between states, the main
tension will continue to be between China and the
United States. ... What we see is the... resurgence of old
Cold War reflexes. ... This technological bipolarity will
create new dependencies and spheres of influence.”

OE Watch | March 2020

22

EURASIA
Continued: Huawei in Europe: Debating Europe’s Position
in a New Technological Cold War
Source: “EU rules out Huawei ban- but maps out strict rules on 5G,” Deutsche Welle, 29 January 2020. https://www.dw.com/en/eu-rules-outhuawei-ban-but-maps-out-strict-rules-on-5g/a-52184309
The EU has said member states should allow Chinese telecoms giant Huawei to operate within the bloc — but with strict regulations to protect national
security. The US has urged allies not to use the technology. The European Union on Wednesday unveiled security guidelines for “high-risk” suppliers in
the opening up of fifth-generation, or 5G, telecoms network across the bloc.
The European Commission did not mention Huawei by name, and it did not recommend a ban on any company in shaping future networks. However,
it said strict rules should be applied where certain suppliers were concerned. Recommendations include blocking high-risk equipment suppliers from
“critical and sensitive” parts of the network, including the core, which keeps track of data and authenticates smartphones on the network.
There was already an expectation that the European Commission would recommend a tightly-regulated role for networks such as Huawei in developing
the EU’s 5G network....
The US has said it believes the company is a potential threat to cybersecurity — and it fears that the firm could be used to conduct cyber espionage on
the part of the Chinese government. It is lobbying allies, including those in Europe, not to use Huawei....
The operators Deutsche Telekom, Vodafone, and Telefonica are all Huawei clients — and they warn that replacing equipment could cost billions of
euros. Huawei leads the global telecoms equipment industry, having a 28% share of the market share worldwide. Nokia is second at 16%, and Ericsson
third at 13%....
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel — who favors a level playing field for all providers —has faced resistance from within her own party from
lawmakers who back US calls for Huawei to be banned outright.
Any ban on Huawei would ultimately be left for individual member states to impose, but the commission’s compromise recommendation provides cover
for European capitals to resist Washington’s demands.
On Tuesday, the UK’s government said it would also allow a restricted role for Huawei in shaping the 5G network in Britain.

Source: “Huawei in Germany: Merkel says its risky to ban any 5G provider,” Al Jazeera, 23 January 2020. https://www.aljazeera.com/
ajimpact/huawei-germany-merkel-risky-ban-5g-provider-200123202320425.html
German operators worry banning Huawei may add years of delays and billions in costs to Germany’s 5G network launch.
... Merkel’s government has been wrangling for weeks over how strict security requirements for Germany’s 5G roll-out should be, and whether they
should effectively shut out Chinese technology giant Huawei from the network.

Source: Eduard Soler i Lecha, “The world in 2020: ten issues that will shape the global agenda,” Barcelona Center for International Affairs
(CIDOB), December 2019. https://www.cidob.org/en/publications/publication_series/notes_internacionals/n1_220/the_world_in_2020_ten_
issues_that_will_shape_the_global_agenda
Technology as a new frontier of power
2020 will be the year of 5G and the decade begins in which we will see great advances in the fields of artificial intelligence and quantum computing,
which may radically alter the economic system, security policies and power relations. ... Classical geopolitical concepts and visions are recovered,
although they are adapted to a competition that does not focus so much on competition for territory but for virtual spaces. This year, but also beyond,
three types of tensions will become even more visible: between states, between states and corporations, and between digital activists and repressive
forces.
In terms of competition between states, the main tension will continue to be between China and the United States. At the business level, what we see is
the consolidation of a kind of technological G2 and the resurgence of old Cold War reflexes. In 2020, one of the main battlegrounds will be the extension
of 5G technology, an area in which China leads. The United States leads the countries that see it as a security threat. This technological bipolarity
will create new dependencies and spheres of influence. But it will also cause reactions among those who are lagging behind and are still confident of
recovering positions and perhaps allying with each other. The recent EU rapprochement with Japan in terms of connectivity is a step in that direction.
India will also attempt to enter the fray, especially in quantum computing. To reduce tensions, the conception of a multilateral initiative to replicate in
the technological field what has been done in terms of trade, disarmament and the fight against climate change is desirable. Perhaps the idea of a global
technological regime will end up taking shape at some point in this decade but this year unilateralism and competition will continue to prevail.
To say that data is the new oil has become a commonplace: it is the most valuable resource, competition for access to it is fierce, and whoever
monopolises most establishes a position of strength over the rest of the players in the system. The difference being that it is not usually states that control
this resource, nourished by the data of their citizens, but large digital empires that end up knowing populations better than their governments and that
have developed an extraordinary ability to escape their control. Although China is the exception.
...
China: forced to choose?
China’s re-emergence as a global power divides those who perceive it as a risk from those who see it as an opportunity. The former are concerned about
losing relative power and the new dependencies and vassal states. The latter may be attracted by diversifying relations with global powers and many see
Beijing as a reliable partner, a committed investor, a strategic ally or their only option. These differences arise between countries but also within them,
where relations with China enter general public debate.
...
The European Union is the other place divisions are opening up over what China’s empowerment means. The union has not yet defined a common
position and the debate will intensify in 2020. In the institutions and capitals of some states – especially Berlin and Paris – China is beginning to be
described as a systemic rival. On the other hand, smaller countries from Portugal and Greece to many central and eastern European countries and Italy
see China as an enticing partner, sovereign debt holder and a key investor, especially in relation to the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) infrastructure
mega-project.

OE Watch | March 2020

23

INDO-PACIFIC
The Strategic Implications of Chinese-Iranian-Russian
Naval Drills in the Indian Ocean
by Syed Fazl-e Haider
Republished and edited for OE Watch in collaboration with the Jamestown Foundation, The China Brief, Vol: 20, Issue: 1, dated 17 January 2020.
For the full article, see: https://jamestown.org/program/the-strategic-implications-of-chinese-iranian-russian-naval-drills-in-the-indian-ocean/

OE Watch Commentary: A series of unprecedented joint naval drills between China, Iran, and Russia were held in the Indian Ocean and the
Sea of Oman from December 27–29. The drills took place just as escalating tensions between the United States and Iran reached a crisis point.
The exercise signified a deepening relationship between Iran and the PRC in economics, diplomacy, and security affairs. In addition, it provided
a symbolic military and political show of support from Russia and China for Iran—and reflected a strategic alignment in the making between the
three countries, with an aim to protect their shared strategic interests in the Indian Ocean. Such a powerful trio would be able to exercise greater
influence in the Middle East, and could present a challenge to the US-led IMSC maritime coalition force.
China and Russia have both increased military and economic cooperation with Iran in the year and a half since the US government pulled out
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). However, while Iran’s government has repeatedly touted its deepening relations with China
and Russia as a show of diplomatic strength, its allies have been less public about the growing relationship. In December, Iranian officials lauded
the trilateral exercises—titled “Marine Security Belt”—as proof that Iran can outlast crippling sanctions with aid from its non-Western allies, and
declared that the drills signaled a new triple alliance in the Middle East. By contrast, Russian and PRC officials framed the joint exercises as part
of routine anti-piracy operations, highlighting their peacekeeping priorities and seeking to depoliticize the drills.
Video and photos of the exercise indicated simple tactical operations, including: live fire drills; an anti-piracy exercise involving Iranian
commandos fast-roping onto a surface vessel; a drill to extinguish flames on a burning ship; and a pass-in review of participating naval vessels on
the final day. The major naval units participating in the exercise were:
•

China: Type-052D (Luyang III)-class guided missile destroyer Xining (DDG-117).

•
Russia: Neustrashimy-class frigate Yaroslav Mudry (FF-777) was the lead Russian unit. It was accompanied by two smaller auxiliary
vessels—the tanker Elnya and the tugboat Viktor Konetsky—from Russia’s Baltic Fleet.
•
Iran: Islamic Republic of Iran Navy (IRIN) frigate Alborz (FF-72) was the most prominent Iranian surface unit involved in the exercise.
Secondary roles were played by the frigate Sahand; the corvette Bayandor; the hovercraft Tondar; and the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps
Navy (IRGCN) vessels Shahid Naserinejad and the catamaran Shahid Nazeri.
Iran and China Report Mixed Messages on the Trilateral Exercises
The Iranian Armed Forces (IAF) flotilla commander in charge of the exercises, Rear Admiral Gholamreza Tahani, said after the drills “the
message of this exercise is peace, friendship and lasting security through cooperation and unity…[and] to show that Iran cannot be isolated.” An
Iranian state television report heralded the drills as signaling a “new triangle of sea power” in the region, and quoted IAF Rear Admiral Hossein
Khanzadi’s bold declaration: “Today, the era of American free action in the region is over, and [US forces] must leave the region gradually.”
Notably, Rear Admiral Tahani also discussed collective naval security arrangements, asserting that countries that share security, economic, and
political interests should cooperate to restore collective security in the region. He described this as particularly important for what he termed the
Indian Ocean’s “Golden Triangle” of strategic straits (the Strait of Hormuz, the Strait of Malacca, and the Bab al-Mandeb), saying: “[N]o single
country can guarantee the security of the oceans. For this purpose, a collective effort is needed. To secure the ocean, countries are seeking synergy
and convergence while holding joint naval exercises in oceanic waters.”
This language contrasted with the more muted tone offered by PRC officials. PRC Ministry of Defense spokesperson Wu Qian said just ahead
of the drills, “The joint exercise is a normal military exchange arrangement of the three countries. It is in line with related international laws and
practices and has no connection with [the] regional situation.” PRC officials also did not explicitly endorse the “Golden Triangle” concept, but they
did endorse the idea of new alignments for collective maritime security. In the same press conference, Spokesperson Wu said, “The naval drills
aim to deepen exchange and cooperation among the navies of the three countries, and display their strong will and capability to jointly maintain
world peace and maritime security, while actively building a maritime community with a shared future.”
(Continued)

OE Watch | March 2020

24

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: The Strategic Implications of Chinese-IranianRussian Naval Drills in the Indian Ocean
The Deepening Strategic Relationship Between China and Iran
The trilateral drills could be viewed as a step towards Iran’s deepening strategic relationship with China, which until now has been predicated
primarily on economic ties. After China’s secondary sanctions waiver expired in May 2019, it continued to buy Iranian oil in defiance of the United
States. In July, the United States sanctioned the Chinese oil processing company Zhuhai Zhenrong and its chief executive Youmin Li, and in late
September imposed sanctions on other Chinese nationals and entities accused of flouting secondary sanctions on Iran—including two subsidiaries
of the Chinese giant COSCO Shipping Corporation.
China faced a difficult challenge in balancing its Iranian trade alongside contentious economic relations with the United States, and some Chinese
companies decreased their business with Iran after sanctions were reimposed rather than risk blowback (total Chinese exports to Iran declined
by close to 40 percent at the end of 2019). However, the activities of some of China’s largest state-owned enterprises indicated Beijing’s intent to
continue purchasing Iranian oil. The PRC made promises in the second half of 2019 to dramatically step up its Iranian investments. Iran’s Foreign
Minister Mohammad Zarif and his PRC counterpart Wang Li reportedly signed memoranda this past August in which Iran granted the state-owned
China National Petroleum Company (CNPC) advantageous contracts to develop controlling stakes in some of its largest oil reserves (to include
the North and South Azadegan oil fields and the supergiant South Pars gas field), and Chinese dealmakers were able to lock in promises for cheap
crude oil and liquid natural gas (LNG) for years to come. Nevertheless, Chinese diplomats have balanced their continuing engagement with Iran
alongside the need to manage a complex Sino-American relationship. While China needs Iranian oil to enable Beijing’s key political priorities of
economic growth and domestic stability, the bilateral dynamic is asymmetric: China supplies nearly a quarter of Iran’s foreign trade, while Iranian
trade represents only one percent of Chinese imports. China has taken advantage of recent opportunities to invest heavily in strategic projects
within Iran, but it has also hedged its bets by engaging with other regional powers, as it does not need Iran in the same way that Iran needs it.
China has also long sought to increase its arms sales to the Middle East, and the current situation provides many opportunities to do so. While it is
nowhere close to supplanting the United States or Russia (the region’s first and second-largest arms providers, respectively), China has increasingly
become an alternative to US arms for many states in the Middle East. During a mid-September visit to Beijing last year, IAF Chief of Staff Major
General Mohammad Baqeri said “Iran attaches great significance to its relations with the People’s Republic of China in all areas. We have longstanding ties in the military sector as well, and hope this visit can be a turning point in the development and reinforcement of [our] relations.”
Trilateral Drills Reveal the Possibility of Competing Collective Security Pacts
A continuing program of Chinese-Iranian-Russian collective maritime security cooperation could pose a challenge to existing US-led initiatives
in the Gulf Region. In November 2019, the US-led International Maritime Security Construct (IMSC) began stability and peacekeeping operations
in the Arabian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, the Strait of Bab el-Mandeb, and the Gulf of Oman. IMSC was formed in the wake of a series of suspected
Iranian attacks (or seizures) directed against oil tankers—as well as two September 2019 attacks on Saudi oil refineries.
Russia had introduced a separate concept for collective security for the Persian Gulf just months before the formation of the IMSC, proposing
an international conference that would lead to the creation of a cooperative security organization in the region. Moscow’s proposal included
establishing military hotlines for communication, and rejecting the permanent deployment of military forces from states outside the region. Beijing
endorsed Moscow’s vision two days after it was presented, stating that such a proposal would benefit “peace and stability in the Persian Gulf region
[which] are of utmost importance to ensure safety and development of the region and the world as a whole.” If the joint military drills by Iran,
Russia, and China signal a nascent maritime cooperative entity in the making, it could create another vector for naval competition between the
United States and China in the Indian Ocean.
Under the pressure of sanctions since 2018, Iran has refused to back down in the face of rapidly escalating tensions with the United States, its
confidence bolstered in large part by continued economic support from China and Russia. In early December, President Rouhani announced Iran’s
2020 “budget of resistance,” which was predicated on a $5 billion loan from Russia and Chinese promises to massively increase the total oil output
of Iran’s energy reserves. Iran has repeatedly and overtly framed its deepening relations with China and Russia as the beginnings of a non-Western
alliance system that could challenge the US-led international order. End OE Watch Commentary (Haider)

OE Watch | March 2020

25

INDO-PACIFIC
Considering “The Ground Battlefield Under Informatized
Conditions”
OE Watch Commentary: Strategies and tactics in
warfare change as new technologies emerge. China
has been striving to maintain pace with the modern
world by developing strategies and tactics that
complement these ongoing changes. One discipline
that has been undergoing dramatic change is that
of close-range combat due to the “informatization”
of the battlefield. In the accompanying article,
published in Jiefangjun Bao, two Chinese scholars
discuss a close combat situation where China is the
weaker military force, facing a stronger enemy that
possesses advanced (informatized) technology. In
the scenario, advanced technology allows China’s
adversary to detect and acquire targets at long range,
execute precise attacks from beyond line of sight,
and conceal combat intent, posing a real challenge
to Chinese forces trying to close their distance with
the enemy to destroy it.
According to the article, there are three phases of
“close combat” in the information age. Phase one People’s Liberation Army troops demonstrating an attack during a visit by Marine Corps General Joe Dunford,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to China on 16 August 2017.
combines various methods to get close to the enemy
Source: Petty Officer 2nd Class Dominiqu A. Pineiro via the Defense Imagery Management Operations Center, 16 August 2017, Public Domain.
“The appearance of U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) visual information does not imply or constitute DoD endorsement.”
in planning. Phase two is the entanglement phase in
Image can be found here: https://core.wazeedigital.com/video/clip/779DVT4_1JYZNLLO1.do
Or: https://www.defense.gov/observe/photo-gallery/igphoto/2001956826/
which the fight is brought to close quarters. Phase
three is the annihilation and destruction of enemy forces.
The article describes various measures that, coupled with having an intimate understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of both the enemy
and friendly sides “as a foundation,” would be effective in closing the distance with the adversary with a reduced chance of detection. These
measures include, for example, capitalizing on factors such as weather and geographical elements, which might degrade the capability of enemy
reconnaissance devices and weapons platforms. The authors describe scenes in which small groups of soldiers approach from various routes,
attacking “quickly and violently,” and networks of air defense firepower attack from varying altitudes and ranges. Another measure suggested is
the use of “flexible deception,” such as putting out false intelligence to mislead the enemy.
In phase two (entanglement) of “close combat,” the article explains that non-contact combat constitutes a major threat to the weaker side.
The authors argue that in order to be victorious, it is essential to not only get closer, but to also employ a number of measures, be flexible in the
employment of tactics, become “closely entangled” with the enemy, create an interlocked pattern of engagement with the enemy, and lessen
the threat of attack by the enemy’s long-range firepower. They go on to describe various aggressive, multi-pronged and joint attack approaches,
ensuring fighting takes place at close quarters, while also disrupting the enemy’s plans and patterns, and using integrated strength to wipe out key
enemy targets while Chinese forces encircle the enemy. It is worth noting that the Chinese concept of “entanglement” is nothing new, but reflects
their experience in the Korean War, where they would negate American airpower and artillery by “hugging” the American ground forces. The
Americans would not call in artillery and air power on their own positions – except in extremis.
In the third phase (annihilation), the authors explain, the more superior the enemy is in information technology, the more they are likely to resort
to asymmetric attack measures. Therefore, “take aim at the weak points of the strong enemy’s informatized platforms and combat arrangements…”
Prioritize a selection of targets in the event not all targets can be destroyed. Concentrate superior forces. Finally, conduct both distant and close-in
battle simultaneously.
The authors argue that despite the rise of informatized warfare, “close combat” has not gone away and in fact, “combat at short range may even
be the main form of combat.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

OE Watch | March 2020

26

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Considering “The Ground Battlefield Under
Informatized Conditions”

“The less the enemy is able to fight close combat, the more we
[China] should step up our research of the issue of close combat on
the informatized battlefield, and thereby firmly grasp the initiative.”
“With the rapid development of new and high technology with
information technology as the core, the ground battlefield under
informatized conditions is no longer restricted to the battlefield in the
geographical sense.”

Source: Ye Huabin and Ai Zhengson, “信息时代如何“近敌”作战 (How to Conduct ‘Close Combat’ in the Information Age),” Jiefangjun
Bao, 16 January 2020. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2020-01/16/content_252327.htm
“Close combat,” as the name says, is combat operations against an enemy conducted at short range. With the rapid development of new and
high technology with information technology as the core, the ground battlefield under informatized conditions is no longer restricted to the
battlefield in the geographical sense. Profound change has occurred in the intention and extension [semantics; the formal definition and the
further range of applicability] of the concept of the battlefield. Thus the methods of closing with the enemy to destroy him face new challenges.
To accurately explore and understand how to fight close combat on the land battlefield under informatized conditions is important in terms of
both theory and practice.
Of first importance in the conduct of close combat is to solve the problem of how to get close to the enemy…The strong enemy can detect and
acquire targets at long range, execute precise attacks from beyond line of sight, conceal his combat intent, and make closing with the enemy
to destroy him increasingly difficult. Thus with a full understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the enemy and friendly sides as a
foundation, integrate the use of measures of various kinds. First of all is many ways of evasion.… A second element is firepower as cover… A
final element is flexible deception.
Combine forces and firepower, get entangled with the enemy and fight at close quarters… faced with a strong enemy, if you hope to be
victorious you must not only solve the problems of “getting close,” you must also take various measures, employ tactics flexibly, get closely
entangled with the enemy, create an interlocked pattern of engagement with the enemy, and lessen the threat of attack from the strong enemy’s
long-range firepower and weapon platforms.
Annihilation and destruction aiding each other, put an end to the enemy in precise release of energy. The more superiority a side has in
information technology, the more that side fears an opponent using “asymmetric” attack measures.
…The less the enemy is able to fight close combat, the more we should step up our research of the issue of close combat on the informatized
battlefield, and thereby firmly grasp the initiative.

OE Watch | March 2020

27

INDO-PACIFIC
The “Blade of Victory”: A Chinese Perspective on Drone
Swarms
OE Watch Commentary: Chinese military strategists and academics have been focusing on artificial intelligence (AI) and how it will reshape
the future battlefield. The application of AI’s capabilities to military planning, operations, and decision support even has its own Chinese
buzzword: “intelligentized” warfare. The growing number of articles and studies describing different aspects of “intelligentized” warfare are a
clear indication of where China is heading. One such article, published in Jiefangjun Bao, the Central Military Commission’s official newspaper,
offers an in-depth look at the use of drone swarms on the future battlefield. The article focuses on the advantages and potential operations in which
drone swarms can be used.
The authors envision drone swarms as the “advance guard” and a force that “will likely become the ‘blade of victory’ in the hands of commanders
at all levels on the future battlefield.” Drone swarm operations offer six “exceptional advantages,” according to the article. They have greater
autonomy, possess more functional capabilities, are more resilient, have a more rapid response time, are more economical, and are less dependent
on logistics and outside support. They can be used to implement multi-domain attacks. The authors explain that a drone swarm platform can even
be used to carry a large number of individual drones in a multi-domain attack scenario. Swarm attacks can be carried out across all domains – on
land, at sea, in the air, in space, along the electromagnetic spectrum, and in cyberspace. Multi-faceted attacks carried out simultaneously across
multiple domains “will destroy the enemy’s cross-domain joint capabilities and achieve combat objectives at a relatively small cost.”
Drone swarms can also be used to conduct tactical deception and interference, reconnaissance, and “smart coordination.” For example, they can
act as decoys to trigger enemy radar and air defense weapons to react and therefore expose their positions. This strategy can be likened to one of
China’s 36 ancient stratagems, “Beat the grass to startle the snake,” an idiom that suggests taking just enough action to prompt the enemy to act
and give away his strategy or position.
Finally, the authors describe ways that drone swarms can carry out reconnaissance to obtain enemy intelligence, and “smart coordination” in
which drones “lead in battlefield reconnaissance and the elimination of targets.” However, the authors argue that drone swarm operations cannot
operate completely independent of man. In situations deemed more risky to lives, due to their lower cost and versatility, a large number of drones
can be used in front-line operations while a manned platform can provide “command and control of the drone swarms from the rear, guiding the
swarms to strike targets in complex, high-risk areas.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“Drone swarms will likely become the “blade of victory” in the hands
of commanders at all levels on the future battlefield.”
Source: Xu Weiwei and Li Huan, “无人机集群作战的主要样式 (The Main Types of Drone Swarm Warfare),” Jiefangjun Bao, 23 January
2020. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2020-01/23/content_252842.htm
The Main Types of Drone Swarm Warfare
…Drone swarm operations are emerging as an important form of intelligentized warfare. In the future, drone operations will become the “advance
guard” in a battle between two armies. Drone swarms will likely become the “blade of victory” in the hands of commanders at all levels on the future
battlefield.
…From their inception, drone swarm operations have always had many exceptional advantages over conventional operations. (1) …Drone swarms
can be flexibly organized into different units. They can adapt to different environments, possess different functions, and perform different tasks… (2) …
After equipping drones with different combat modules, a drone swarm formation can have multiple functions, such as reconnaissance and surveillance,
soft and hard strikes, and combat assessment… (3) …Drone swarm operations can quickly transmit battlefield information and accurately implement
commanders’ intentions… (4) …An individual drone has several advantages, such as being a small target, the ability to withstand impact, large overload
capacity, maintaining flight under silent mode, and effective concealment on the battlefield, etc… (5) …A drone swarm operation eliminates the limitations
of human-operated machines. There is no need to install complex safety systems and protective facilities to ensure safety of personnel… (6) In the course
of drone swarm operations, an individual drone’s dependence on logistics and support is low…
…The basic method of multi-domain attacks is to use a drone swarm platform to carry a large number of individual drones. During the battle,
the drones are launched or deployed through the platform as battle groups to achieve data sharing, flight control, situational awareness, and
intelligentized decision-making, so that the drones can flexibly respond to battlefield contingencies and conduct various combat missions, such as swarm
reconnaissance, fighting, and attacks. The domains in which attacks by a swarm operation take place will be across all domains: on land, at sea, in the
air, in space, along the electromagnetic spectrum, and in cyberspace. …
…Based on mission needs, a drone swarm can be flexibly configured with various modules, such as modules for reconnaissance, information processing,
and missile firepower, thereby forming a composite formation with reconnaissance, interference, and strike capabilities. Alternatively, several drone
swarms can each be configured with reconnaissance and firepower modules, forming a large assault formation that penetrates deep into enemy territory
and conducts real-time reconnaissance and strikes on key or high-risk targets, thereby achieving strategic operational goals.

OE Watch | March 2020

28

INDO-PACIFIC
China Summons the PLA to Prevent and Contain the
Coronavirus
OE Watch Commentary: The recent coronavirus outbreak in China
has led to fears of social instability among the Communist Party, which
has summoned the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to retain a sense
of security and order among the public. The accompanying passages
from Chinese state-run sources highlight recent PLA activities to
deal with the outbreak, painting a picture of the PLA having things
under control, with one source noting that military vehicles provide
“valuable spiritual comfort” to panicked citizens. The final passage
from Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post paints a more
realistic picture of the situation.
On 12 February, Chinese state-run China Military Daily announced
new efforts by the PLA to prevent and control the novel coronavirus,
officially named COVID-19, in the city of Beijing. According to the
article, a new fever clinic was opened at the Sixth Medical Center
of the PLA’s General Hospital, which can receive up to 100 people
per day and isolate 10 patients suffering from symptoms at a time.
The fever clinic is divided into a “clean” zone, “semi-polluted” zone,
and “polluted” zone in order to properly organize medical staff and
patients. In the clean zone, there is a warehouse, pharmacy, and
cafeteria. The semi-polluted zone consists of the hallways within the
hospital and the nurse station while the polluted zone has bathrooms
and patient rooms. The security unit of the hospital now has seven
medical teams of over 260 people, which serves as an epidemic
prevention and control network.

Computer render of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19).

Source: CDC/ Alissa Eckert, MS; Dan Higgins, MAM via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2019-nCoV-CDC-23312.
png, Public Domain

On 13 February, state-run media outlet China National Defense
News outlined the efforts of officials to help the families of PLA soldiers providing medical relief. In the Banan District of Chongqing, Wang
Enping, a political commissar of the People’s Armed Forces Department, visited with family members of military doctors stationed in Wuhan. The
Ministry of Armed Affairs arranged to help family members buy daily necessities. Additional assistance was provided for the families including
supervision and tutoring for children. Another article published by the state-run PLA Daily on 13 February revealed that a PLA unit dedicated to
anti-epidemic support traveled to three towns near Wuhan. The article noted that “while waiting in the unknown, many people start to become
anxious, restless, and panicked,” but seeing military vehicles passing by their windows is a “valuable spiritual comfort to them.”
Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post noted on 9 February that the coronavirus outbreak prompted the Chinese military’s biggest
mobilization of medical personnel in decades, and remains a test for their crisis management skills. According to military commentator Song
Zhongping, the PLA “has many advantages and medical resources they can draw on, including their military hospitals and military researchers
and institutes. This is part of their key mission in non-traditional defense operations.” The outbreak happened merely months after the government
of Hubei province organized an epidemic readiness drill in preparation to host the 2019 Military World Games in Wuhan. However, as one PLA
veteran complains, “The outbreak of the novel coronavirus and the inefficient operation of Hubei government indicate that the crisis management
drill was just a show, and now the whole country and the PLA have to clean up the mess.” End OE Watch Commentary (Hartnett)

“The outbreak of the novel coronavirus and the
inefficient operation of Hubei government indicate that
the crisis management drill was just a show, and now the
whole country and the PLA have to clean up the mess.”

OE Watch | March 2020

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China Summons the PLA to Prevent and
Contain the Coronavirus
Source: Mao Yu, “The new fever clinic of the Sixth Medical Center of the General Hospital of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army was
officially put into battle,” China Military Online, 12 February 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/action/2020-02/12/content_4860314.htm
A new platform has been developed for the prevention and control of new coronavirus pneumonia. On February 10, the reporter saw at the
Sixth Medical Center of the General Hospital of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army. Rows of box-shaped “white houses” stood parallel to
the emergency outpatient area of the center. The fever clinic signs were particularly eye-catching, and 10 fevers were isolated. The ward was
officially opened, and it became another new position in the center’s battle.
It is understood that the new diagnosis area is “three zones and two lines,” that is, divided into clean areas, semi-polluted areas, polluted
areas, cleanliness, and pollution lines, including medical care rooms, buffer rooms, waiting rooms, and rescue rooms.
The standard procedures for pre-inspection and sub-inspection, in-patient treatment, inspection and testing, isolation and observation,
and sewage treatment are more standardized. The average daily capacity of receiving patients is up to 100 people, which can achieve
simultaneous isolation between 10 patients with a fever.
The affiliated security unit has organized 7 medical teams of more than 260 people to enter the combat state, effectively forming an epidemic
prevention and control chain network.
Source: Zhang Rui & Qing Ying, “You work in the frontline at the peril of sacrificing yourself, while we watch your back,” China National
Defense News, 13 February 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/mobilization/2020-02/13/content_4860385.htm
Wang Enping, a political commissar of the People’s Armed Forces Department of the district, said that three of the military medical team
members who had gone to Wuhan this time had their home addresses in Banan District. In order to relieve the worries of frontline military
doctors fighting the epidemic, relevant military and field departments actively carried out a series of special forms of condolences to solve the
problems for the family members of military doctors.
Lu Yi learned by phone that Zhang Cheng’s family lived with a relative who had come from Hubei for the Spring Festival. The family was
still in isolation and it was inconvenient to purchase daily necessities, so the Ministry of Armed Affairs arranged for someone to help them
buy daily necessities.
The Education Commission coordinated with the school where military babies were located, and assigned teachers to provide one-on-one
counselling and supervision to the children’s learning.
Source: Song Tianguo, Hong Peishu, & He Wutao, “Fighting the frontier of the ‘epidemic,’ unblocking the livelihood supply line,” PLA
Daily, 13 February 2020. www.mod.gov.cn/education/2020-02/13/content_4860370.htm
In the past few days, this special support force, approved by the Central Military Commission to draw up a group, traveled to and from three
towns of Wuhan to transport medical supplies for daily life, effectively alleviating the pressure of Wuhan’s transportation and ensuring the
normal supply of life for Wuhan citizens.
Indeed, the epidemic clouded over Wuhan, and megacities with tens of millions of people suddenly pressed the ‘pause button.’ What to do if I
can’t buy vegetables? What if I can’t get a car? While waiting in the unknown, many people start to become anxious, restless, and panicked.
Many Wuhan citizens nestling in their homes, partaking in one of the “entertainment activities” every day, is lying next to the window and
watching the military vehicles passing by. This is a valuable spiritual comfort to them.

Source: Minnie Chan, “China’s military put to the crisis test in coronavirus call-up,” South China Morning Post, 9 February 2020. https://
www.scmp.com/print/news/china/military/article/3049672/chinas-military-put-crisis-test-coronavirus-call
The coronavirus crisis has prompted one of the Chinese military’s biggest mobilizations of medical personnel in decades, putting its crisis
management skills to the test.
Hong Kong-based military commentator Song Zhongping said military staff were well equipped to deal with a crisis. “The PLA has many
advantages and medical resources they can draw on, including their military hospitals and military researchers and institutes. This is part of
their key mission in non-traditional defense operations,” Song said.
The outbreak comes just months after Hubei organized an epidemic readiness drill as part of preparations to host the 2019 Military
World Games in Wuhan. “The outbreak of the novel coronavirus and the inefficient operation of Hubei government indicate that the crisis
management drill was just a show, and now the whole country and the PLA have to clean up the mess,” the Tangshan veteran said.

OE Watch | March 2020

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Abu Sayyaf Kidnapping Indonesians at Sea
OE Watch Commentary: The jihadist group Abu
Sayyaf, based in the Philippines, continues to pose
a threat to regional security. As the accompanying
passage discusses, the group kidnapped eight
Indonesian citizens (three fishermen in late 2019
and five others in mid-January 2020) in two recent
incidents which were “masterminded by the same
figures.”
One of the complications with the most recent
kidnapping, according to the article, is that Abu
Sayyaf is primarily comprised of militants from
the Philippines, but the operation involving the
kidnapping of Indonesians took place in Malaysian
waters. Thus, Indonesia must cooperate with
Malaysian authorities more than authorities from
the Philippines. The articles points out that one of
the steps that Indonesia’s Coordinating Minister
for Political, Legal, and Security Affairs will
consider taking to prevent future kidnappings is
to recommend Indonesians not fish in Malaysian
waters.

Pump boats used by Abu Sayyaf in 2017 Bohol attack.

The article also reveals the dilemma Indonesia Source: Armed Forces of the Philippines via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pump_boats_used_by_Abu_Sayyaf_in_2017_Bohol_attack.jpg, Public
Domain
faces when trying to rescue hostages or negotiate
with Abu Sayyaf. For example, the three fishermen kidnapped by Abu Sayyaf in late 2019 were all rescued, but there is no guarantee a rescue
attempt will succeed again in the more recent case involving five Indonesian fishermen. Alternatively, paying a ransom to Abu Sayyaf could
embolden the kidnappers and boost their financial coffers. Nevertheless, according to the article, this is exactly why Indonesia’s Foreign Minister
and Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal, and Security Affairs is planning meetings to discuss with other counterparts how to prevent Abu
Sayyaf’s kidnappings of Indonesian fishermen. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“One of the recommendations was to agree with the request of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs that Indonesian fishermen do not go into
Malaysian waters.”
Source: “Mahfud MD Sebut Abu Sayyaf Penculik 5 WNI di Laut Malaysia (Mahfud MD Claims Abu Sayyaf Kidnaps 5 Indonesians in
Malaysian Sea).” Nasional Tempo, 20 January 2020. https://nasional.tempo.co/read/1297439/mahfud-md-sebut-abu-sayyaf-penculik-5-wnidi-laut-malaysia
The Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal and Security Affairs Mahfud MD said the kidnapping of five Indonesian citizens in Malaysian
waters last week was Abu Sayyaf. He said the abduction was masterminded by the same figures who abducted three Indonesian citizens at
the end of last year. He deplored this incident, and stated, “We managed to free three, but suddenly five were taken again. This is a matter
of security at sea, and the sea is not the sea of Indonesia.” Mahfud also said he had thought of several efforts so that this incident would
not continue to repeat itself. One of the recommendations was to agree with the request of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that Indonesian
fishermen do not go into Malaysian waters.
Five fishermen are still missing. They were known to be on a tug boat, which had eight passengers. On January 15, 2020, the ship was
reported missing. Two days later, the tug boat was found with only three passengers.

OE Watch | March 2020

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia to Bolster Nationalism to Deradicalize
Returning ISIS Members
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying article from an Indonesian
source sheds light on Indonesia’s considerations regarding deradicalizing
former members of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and preventing
future radicalization of today’s youths. According to the article, there are as
many as “600 Indonesian ex-ISIS members in detention camps in Syria.”
Apparently, these members “have stated that they want to return to Indonesia
after.... the total defeat of [ISIS].”
The country’s Deputy on Deradicalization notes that these ex-ISIS
members had a low sense of nationalism before they adopted the ideology
of ISIS, which existed for at least 20 years in Indonesia, where little has
been done to combat such ideologies. As a result, he claims that an increased
promotion of nationalism can help combat radicalization. He seeks to achieve
this by signing a Memoranda of Understanding with the Pancasila Ideology
Development Board (BPIP) to prioritize teaching Pancasila to schoolchildren,
who in previous years received insufficient Pancasila education. Pancasila
refers to Indonesia’s five national principles, including belief in God, just and
civilized humanity, national unity, democracy, and social justice.
On the political level, this strategy will be implemented though means such
as holding flag ceremonies in government ministries every Monday. These
ceremonies will also be held in schools and other institutions throughout
the country. Whether Indonesia’s Deputy on Deradicalization is correct in
asserting that nationalism will triumph over ISIS ideology remains to be
seen. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)
Pancasila shield, depicting the five symbols representing five principles of
Pancasila, the Indonesian ideology.

Source: Gunawan Kartapranata via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pancasila_Perisai.svg, Public
Domain

“They have stated that they want to return to Indonesia after their
dream of living together with ISIS was completely destroyed.”
Source: “Deputi BNPT: Tak Mudah Deradikalisasi Eks Kombatan ISIS (BNPT Deputy: Not Easy to Deradicalize Ex-ISIS Combatants),”
Nasional Republika, 20 January 2020. https://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/q4dvxy377/deputi-bnpt-tak-mudah-deradikalisasi-eks-kombatanisis
Deputy for Prevention, Protection and Deradicalization of the National Counterterrorism Agency (BNPT) Major General Hendri
Paruhuman Lubis said it was not easy to deradicalize former ISIS combatants. “They have been indoctrinated by ISIS ideology and it is
not easy to eliminate and restore their ideology as it was before.” At present, according to him, there are around 600 Indonesian ex-ISIS
members in detention camps in Syria. They have stated that they want to return to Indonesia after their dream of living together with ISIS was
completely destroyed and the total defeat of the terrorist group.
According to him, the narrow belief in nationalism has become one of the causes of the spread of radicalism that has been anti-Pancasila,
and has tended to label others as disbelievers in the decade since the last 20 years. “That is why I am today in front of approximately 300
officials of Indonesia to give lectures on the concept of nationalism regarding radicalism,” Hendri said.
Every citizen must have a national outlook so that Indonesia becomes a large, sovereign, just and prosperous nation. “That is why we
have signed an MoU with the Pancasila Ideology Development Board (BPIP) so that we prioritize the ideology of Pancasila which has been
abandoned by many school children,” he said. He revealed they would start carrying out small activities. One of them is holding a flag
ceremony every Monday in ministries, state institutions, and schools.

OE Watch | March 2020

32

INDO-PACIFIC
The Indian Military’s Concerns with Chinese 5G
OE Watch Commentary: Over the past few years the Indian Army has
been upgrading its weapons and equipment in order to be better prepared for
a potential conflict with China. While these efforts have focused on mobile
brigades or improved infrastructure for ammunition stores, the accompanying
excerpted article reports on an issue that the Indian Army believes could be just
as important.
The article, from the English-language news website The Print, reports how the
army “red-flagged the possibility of Chinese 5G services being introduced in the
country,” specifically that “such services could compromise the entire command
and communication structure of the Indian military.” The article mentions that
the Indian government considered preventing China from entering in a oneyear 5G trial period, but that ultimately, the “Narendra Modi government
has... allowed all network equipment makers, including China’s Huawei, to
participate.” An Indian officer quoted in the article expresses concern that a
Chinese company “will be able to beat all competition because of their prices”
due to the government’s procurement policy being “based on the lowest bidder
concept” as the Indian government moves forward with the technology.
Finally, the article highlights one of the main concerns the army has with
Chinese 5G services, specifically that it will allow “access to Indian military
communication through some kind of a back-door.” The article reports that the
one-year 5G trial that Huawei is involved with started last year and includes
the “education, agriculture, waste management and healthcare” sectors, though
nothing is mentioned about the armed forces. While it will be several months
until the trial ends and any agreement is presumably reached, the article shows
how the Indian Army continues to view China as a threat. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

BEL Battlefield Surveillance Radar-Short Range (BFSR-SR) on display at Aero
India-2007.
Source: Arun Vishwakarma, Webmaster, www.Bharat-Rakshak.com (en). Uploaded by User:Sniperz11 via
Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BFSR-SR_with_thermal_imager.JPG, CC BY-SA 2.5

“Sources said the main worry is that the Chinese will be able to beat
all competition because of their prices.”
Source: Snehesh Alex Philip, “‘Concerned’ Army red-flags possibility of China’s Huawei 5G services entering India,” The Print, 15 January
2020. https://theprint.in/defence/concerned-army-red-flags-possibility-of-chinas-huawei-5g-services-entering-india/349879/
The Army has red-flagged the possibility of Chinese 5G services being introduced in the country, saying there is a huge security risk and that
such services could compromise the entire command and communication structure of the Indian military…
Sources said the Army along with the Navy and the Air Force had given its inputs on the 5G technology to the government like many other
agencies and departments.
After due deliberations, the Narendra Modi government has however allowed all network equipment makers, including China’s Huawei, to
participate in 5G trials.
…Sources said the main worry is that the Chinese will be able to beat all competition because of their prices.
“The Chinese 5G technology will come the cheapest and they will emerge as the lowest bidder. India’s procurement policy is based on the
lowest bidder concept,” another officer told The Print.
…Officers explained that the risk is China, which India is racing to defend itself against with better weapons and infrastructure along the
northern and eastern borders, will get access to Indian military communication through some kind of a back-door.
They said the concerns have been expressed by all the three Services — the Army, the Navy and the IAF…China has on its part warned India
of economic consequences if Huawei were excluded from 5G development and deployments.
…In June, the Department of Telecommunications had approved a one-year 5G trial period with focus on three big social sectors —
education, agriculture, waste management and healthcare.
OE Watch | March 2020

33

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia Facilitates Dialogue between Turkey and Syria
OE Watch Commentary: On 13 January,
Turkish and Syrian intelligence chiefs Hakan
Fidan and Maj. Gen. Ali Mamlouk met in
Moscow, in “the first high-level meeting between
the two sides since 2011.” As the accompanying
article argues, the meeting between the two
“spymasters” to reset Turkish-Syrian relations
is the result of on-going Russian pressure to
broker a peace deal and normalize relations.
As the article notes, both intelligence chiefs are
known to be close confidants of their countries’
respective presidents. The Russian-supported
al-Assad regime’s desire to take full control of
the Syrian city of Idlib, the last rebel stronghold,
challenges Turkish-Russian relations, as the
Russian-backed Syrian army’s offensive into the
city has resulted in deaths among the Turkish
forces in the area.

Turkish soldiers conduct patrol on outside Mabij, Syria.

Source: Voice of America via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkish_soldiers_conduct_patrol_on_outside_Manbij,_Syria.jpg, Public Domain

According to the article, Russia has two reasons to push the sides to resume relations. First, normalization would minimize the military
confrontation between the regime and Turkish forces in Syria. It would also pave the way for Turkey to withdraw support from anti-regime armed
groups mostly concentrated in Idlib, forcing these groups to compromise. These developments would ultimately help conclude the Syrian conflict.
Al-Assad’s regime expects Turkey to respect Syrian sovereignty by withdrawing its troops from Syria and ending support for Syrian opposition
groups. Second, Moscow argues that resuming relations is likely to help Syria’s economy, which is “on the brink of collapse due to the war and
sanctions” and the economic situation “is threatening the military gains the Syrian government forces have achieved on the battlefield.”
The article points out that it is unlikely that Turkey would withdraw its troops from Syria “without ensuring a mechanism to completely eliminate”
the Democratic Union Party (PYD) and the People’s Protection Units (YPG). However, it is highly unlikely for Turkey to get assurances from the
Syrian regime or Russia on this issue. On the contrary, Russia is trying to secure cultural autonomy for the Kurds “in order to end the American
military presence in Syria, particularly around oil fields under the control of Syrian Kurdish groups.” According to the article, Russia developed
“two strategies to thwart Turkey’s possible objections to this idea.” The first strategy is to offer Turkey a share in the post-conflict reconstruction
of Syria. Turkish construction companies getting a share in the reconstruction of Syria could help elevate stagnant economic growth in Turkey.
Also, Turkish companies providing vital supplies to Syria will contribute positively to both countries. The second strategy is to support Turkey in
the power struggle over natural gas resources in the Eastern Mediterranean. Turkey does desperately need a boost for its economy and support in
the Eastern Mediterranean over natural gas exploration; however it is not clear if these conditions will suffice in light of Turkey’s threat perception
regarding Kurdish transnationalism. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“A possible Russian-brokered
reconciliation between Ankara and
Damascus could change the course
of Syrian’s nearly 9-year-old civil
war…”

OE Watch | March 2020

34

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia Facilitates Dialogue between Turkey
and Syria
Source: “Syrian crisis dictates peace between Damascus and Ankara” Al-monitor.com, 26 January 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2020/01/turkey-syria-conditions-dictate-peace-fidan-mamlouk-meeting.html
A possible Russian-brokered reconciliation between Ankara and Damascus could change the course of Syrian’s nearly 9-year-old civil war
amid the unprecedented level of clashes in Idlib.
…
The ramped-up Russian efforts finally translated into a high-level direct dialogue between the two sides when Turkey’s intelligence chief
Hakan Fidan and his Syrian counterpart Maj. Gen. Ali Mamlouk met in Moscow on Jan. 13. Despite ongoing low-profile contacts, the face-toface encounter of the two represents the first high-level meeting between the two sides since 2011.
…Russia is pushing for restoration of ties on the basis of the 1998 Adana accord, which envisages enhanced security cooperation against
terrorist organizations. The two spymasters are said to have agreed on a nine-point road map to advance the dialogue, including a goal to
cooperate against terrorism, according to Turkish reports.
…
The meeting also stood witness to a first: Fidan and Mamlouk reportedly discussed possible cooperation grounds against the Syrian Kurdish
Democratic Union Party (PYD) and its armed wing, the People’s Protection Units (YPG).
…Their capacity as spy chiefs aside, both Mamlouk and Fidan are known as close associates to the leaders of their countries…
…
The Russian side says a “reset” between Turkey and the Syrian regime is a must for two reasons.
First, once the relations between Ankara and Damascus normalize, Turkey-backed armed forces would have no choice but to compromise,
lessening the potential for violent conflict; Turkey would have to stop supporting the armed Syrian opposition, thwarting any possible
confrontation between the Turkish army and regime forces.
Second, the normalization of political relations could help mitigate the financial problems of the Syrian economy, which is on the brink of
collapse due to the war and sanctions. The economic crisis is threatening the military gains the Syrian government forces have achieved on
the battlefield. Turkey’s contribution to the reconstruction efforts of the country would also be important.
However, Turkey’s support for the Syrian rebels and the Turkish military presence in the Syrian territories continue to be a deal breaker for
the Damascus government.
…
The widespread opinion is that Turkey will not agree to withdraw its military presence from the war-torn country without ensuring a
mechanism to completely eliminate the PYD and the YPG.
…
Russia deems it necessary that Kurds have at least a cultural autonomy in order to end the American military presence in Syria, particularly
around oil fields under the control of Syrian Kurdish groups.
The Russian side is said to be developing two strategies to thwart Turkey’s possible objections to this idea: giving Turkey a share in the
reconstruction process in Syria and establishing a cooperation bloc between Syria, Turkey and Russia to support Ankara’s policies in the
energy war over hydrocarbon resources in the eastern Mediterranean.

China’s cyber policy appears to have three vectors
—peace activist, espionage activist, and attack
planner— that dominate China’s cyber policy.
Some are always hidden from view while others
are demonstrated daily. Three Faces of the Cyber
Dragon is divided into sections that coincide with
these vectors.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195610/download

OE Watch | March 2020

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russian Special Operations in Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Information on Russian SOF actions in Syria is sparse, but the high-profile deaths of four Russian snipers in Syria
on 1 February, sheds some light on some of their activities. The Russian media has reported that the FSB Spetsnaz Center (TsSN FSB) [Центр
специального назначения ФСБ (ЦСН ФСБ)] has personnel in Syria on a rotational basis, actively engaged in combat operations. According to
the accompanying excerpted article from Novaya Gazeta, at least two, 2-man sniper teams were on an advance party to reconnoiter a potential
meeting area for Turkish and Syrian military leaders on the Turkish-Syrian Border, near the City of Kasab. While returning from the mission,
Major Ruslan Gimadiyev and Captain Dmitriy Minov, from the TsSN “K” Directorate (unit focusing on the specializing on the Caucasus); and
Major Bulat Akhmatyanov and Lieutenant Vsevolod Trofimov from the TsSN “S” Directorate (counterterrorism unit) were killed in an ambush.
This rotation was at least the second short-term rotation for the two sniper teams, as the article points out that the teams had provided security for
President Putin’s January 2020 visit to Syria. The deaths of these high-profile Russian personnel likely add to Russia’s desire to facilitate direct
dialogue between Turkey and Syria (see: “Russia Facilitates Dialogue between Turkey and Syria,” in this issue of OE Watch). End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“The deceased were specialists of the highest class and they
used them for the qualitative reinforcement of Syrian Army
subunits, which are conducting local engagements…”

Source: Irek Murtazin, “Их добивали, стреляя в упор: В гибели четырех офицеров спецназа ФСБ в Сирии не обошлось без
предательства (They Killed Them, While Shooting Them at Point Blank Range: Betrayal Played a Hand in the Deaths of Four FSB Spetsnaz
Officers in Syria),” Novaya Gazeta Online, 4 February 2020. https://iz.ru/648658/aleksei-ramm/my-zdes-v-komandirovke-oni-uzhe-shest-letvoiuiut
They Killed Them, While Shooting Them at Point Blank Range: Betrayal Played a Hand in the Deaths of Four FSB Spetsnaz Officers in
Syria
Major Bulat Akhmatyanov’s daughter was born on 3 February. But he will never see her. The FSB Spetsnaz Center officer died in Syria
two days before his daughter’s birth – on 1 February. The two older children of 33-year-old Major Akhmatyanov will also remain without a
father, as will the families of 42-year-old Major Ruslan Gimadiyev, 35-year-old Captain Dmitriy Minov, and 36-year-old Lieutenant Vsevolod
Trofimov with two children each. All of them were serving at the FSB TsSN and also died on 1 February in Syria.
The deceased were serving in the FSB Spetsnaz Center and constituted sniper pairs. Minov and Gimadiyev – in the TsSN “K” Directorate
and Akhmatyanov and Trofimov – in the “S” Directorate. The abbreviation “K” – is the designation of the subunit, which specializes in
special operations in the Caucasus. S – is the designation of the special operations directorate, which is involved with the elimination and
detention of terrorists. The deceased were specialists of the highest class and they used them for the qualitative reinforcement of Syrian Army
subunits, which are conducting local engagements – just like allocating a “Kinzhal” complex with nuclear weapons to reinforce a motorized
rifle company…
Based upon our sources’ version, a meeting of the highest leaders of Syria and Turkey was being prepared on the Turkish-Syrian Border,
near the City of Kasab. And Syria requested assistance from Russia to provide the security of this meeting. Majors Akhmatyanov and
Gimadiyev, Captain Minov, and Lieutenant Trofimov were sent to Syria to accomplish this mission. And they ended up in an ambush, when
they were returning from reconnoitering the terrain.
The fact that they sent precisely these officers there – was not by chance. In January, this was already their second temporary assignment to
Syria. At the beginning of the year, they participated in providing security for the Russian President’s visit to Damascus.
If the information about the ambush, in which the FSB officers found themselves, corresponds to reality, the assumption arises: this was a
targeted killing – someone needed to disrupt the Turkish-Syrian talks…

OE Watch | March 2020

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey’s Cooperation with Ukraine: A Message to Russia?
OE Watch Commentary: On 2 February, the
eighth meeting of the Ukraine-Turkey High Level
Strategic Council was held in Kiev under the
chairmanship of Turkish and Ukrainian presidents.
The sides signed several agreements, including one
to expand defense cooperation. The visit coincided
with seven Turkish soldiers being killed in Syria
by Russian-backed Syrian regime forces and raised
questions regarding the future of Russian-Turkish
relations. The accompanying passages from Turkish
sources discuss the significance of the visit, in light
of the most recent challenges in Turkey-Russia
relations.
The first excerpted article from Turkish stateowned Anadolu Ajansı reports that the Turkish
President was reciprocating Ukrainian President
Vladimir Zelensky’s visit to Turkey in August
2019. As the article points out, the visit was closely
followed and heavily criticized by the Russian
media. The article claims that the most important
issue discussed in the meeting was the situation
in Crimea, and the Turkish President expressed
his support for the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Turkey Ukraine Locator.
The author cautions that Turkey must manage this
Source: Turkish Flame via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Turkey_Ukraine_Locator.png, Public domain
delicate issue well because of its relations with
Russia. According to the article, energy was also discussed, though Ukraine and Turkey are now competing to transfer Russian natural gas to
European countries. In this context, both countries discussed a free trade agreement even though they are far from signing one. The leaders also
discussed the security of the Black Sea and Turkey’s desire to purchase helicopters from Ukraine.
The second article from Turkey’s left-leaning newspaper Birgün provides highlights from both presidents’ press conferences. Besides the points
highlighted in the first article, President Erdoğan stated that Turkey does not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea and will provide support
to protect sovereignty of Ukraine. Additionally, he noted that all parties to the Astana and Sochi agreements should “know their obligations” in a
message to Moscow. For his part, President Zelensky highlighted the military and financial cooperation agreement by which Turkey is to provide
over 33 million dollars of military aid to Ukraine, a country battling Russian forces in its Donbas Region. This follows a previous agreement
signed in the fall of 2019 when Turkish defense company Baykar Makina agreed to export six Bayraktar TB2 Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
to Ukraine. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“Turkey needs…a delicate balance... On one
hand, Vladimir Zelenskiy expects concrete
steps from Turkey. On the other hand,
Vladimir Putin had invited President Erdoğan
to an opening of a mosque in Crimea.”

OE Watch | March 2020

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey’s Cooperation with Ukraine: A
Message to Russia?
Source: Prof. Dr. İlyas Kemaloğlu, “Türkiye-Ukrayna ilişkilerinde hassas denge (Delicate balance in Turkey-Ukraine relations),” Anadolu
Ajansı, 5 February 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz/turkiye-ukrayna-iliskilerinde-hassas-denge-/1724963
…President Erdoğan’s visit to Ukraine was closely followed in Russia... However, the visit coinciding with the killing of seven Turkish
soldiers in Idlib which led to the questioning of Turkey-Russia relations gave the visit a different dimension……
The Crimean issue was undoubtedly the most important topic of bilateral talks. President Erdogan once again said Turkey defends the
territorial integrity of Ukraine… While Ankara has been defending the territorial integrity of Ukraine from the beginning, it has tried not to
raise this issue in its relations with Russia…
Turkey needs to follow a delicate balance in this regard. On one hand, Vladimir Zelenskiy expects concrete steps from Turkey. On the other
hand, Vladimir Putin had invited President Erdoğan to an opening of a mosque in Crimea.
…
Issues such as maintaining security in the Black Sea region… and purchasing helicopters from Ukraine were also among the topics
discussed.
…most of the Russian press had very negative comments regarding President Erdoğan’s visit to Ukraine.

Source: “Erdoğan’dan İdlib açıklaması: ‘Herkes yükümlülüğünü bilsin’ (A statement on Idlib from Erdoğan: ‘Everyone should know
their obligation’),” Birgun.net, 03 February 2020. https://www.birgun.net/haber/erdogan-dan-idlib-aciklamasi-herkes-yukumlulugunubilsin-286572
I hope that everybody knows their obligations within the framework of the Astana and Sochi agreements, and we will continue to work in this
framework.
…
Referring to Turkey-Ukraine relations Zelenskiy, “thanks to the military-financial cooperation agreement Ukrainian army will get help from
its Turkish partners. We are grateful for that” he said.
The following agreements were signed between the two countries:
Military Financial Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, Cash
Assistance Application Protocol between the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | March 2020

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
TurkStream’s Role in Energy Security and Turkish-Russian
Relations

OE Watch Commentary: On 8 January, Turkish President
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Russian President Vladimir Putin
met in Istanbul to inaugurate TurkStream, which will carry
natural gas from Russia to Europe via Turkey. TurkStream is
a dual natural gas pipeline each with an annual capacity of
15.75 billion cubic meters. One pipeline will supply natural
gas to Turkey and the other, scheduled to open later in 2020,
will supply Russian natural gas to southern and southeastern
Europe. TurkStream begins at Anapa in Russia and delivers
gas through the Black Sea basin to Kıyıköy in the Kırklareli
province in northwestern Turkey and then to Europe. It will
be operated by Turkish and Russian companies BOTAŞ
and Gazprom respectively. The accompanying article from
Turkey’s state-run Anadolu Ajansı provides insight into the
importance of TurkStream for Turkish energy security and
Turkish-Russian relations.

With this project, Russian natural gas will flow through
Turkey
to Europe for the first time and will likely strengthen
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Vladimir Putin at the opening ceremony of TurkStream Pipeline.
Source: kremlin.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Recep_Tayyip_Erdo%C4%9Fan_and_Vladimir_Putin_at_the_opening_ceremony_of_
Turkey’s position in Europe “as a country that contributes
TurkStream_Pipeline_2.jpg, CC-BY-4.0
to” European energy security. Additionally, the TurkStream
project contributes to Turkey’s ambition of becoming an energy hub in the region. Russia is the top natural gas supplier to Turkish markets, with
Turkey previously receiving Russian gas through BlueStream under the Black Sea and the onshore West Line through Ukraine. However, Turkey
faced several challenges with this pipeline. First, the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine led to interruption in natural gas transiting
from Ukraine through the West Line. Second, the West Line and other natural gas pipelines transiting Ukraine were at the end of their life span
and required major repairs, jeopardizing Turkey’s energy security. Therefore, TurkStream has eliminated any infrastructure failure issues that
could have disrupted natural gas flow to Turkey and strengthened Turkey’s energy security.
The article also points out that the TurkStream project “increases the mutual dependency between Ankara and Moscow, positively contributes
to the advancement of cooperation for future relations between both countries” in many areas including issues concerning Syria and Libya. The
article further argues that this increase in cooperation in the energy sector “will provide significant flexibility to Turkey in foreign policy.” The
article also states that Turkey strives to reduce its dependence on Russian natural gas by diversifying its suppliers as well as investing in renewable
energy to decrease its natural gas consumption. Contrary to many analysts, the author states that TurkStream increases Russia’s dependence on
Turkey because the pipeline enables Russian gas to flow to Europe by allowing Russia to by-pass Ukraine. Additionally, the author argues that this
project will benefit Turkey economically and strengthen its position in Europe, as Hungary, Bulgaria and Serbia will depend on TurkStream for
their energy security. (Also see: “The Geopolitics of TurkStream and the Complexities of Bulgaria’s Foreign Policy,” in this issue of OE Watch)
End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“While TurkStream brings Ankara and Moscow closer, it
also presents gains for Turkey concerning Syria and Libya,
which are important issues of foreign policy.”
Source: “TurkStream to strengthen Turkey’s energy hub position” Anadolu Ajansı, 08 January 2020. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/analysis/
analysis-turkstream-to-strengthen-turkey-s-energy-hub-position/1695585#!
The inauguration of the TurkStream natural gas pipeline project, which will begin carrying natural gas from Russia to Europe via Turkey on Jan. 8, 2020, is considered a further step
in Turkish and Russian relations in terms of energy.
The project, which has two lines, each of which has a carrying capacity of 15.75 billion cubic meters of natural gas, is particularly important for southern European countries. It will
mark the first time that Russian natural gas will reach Europe via Turkey. The TurkStream project transfers natural gas directly to Turkey, which the country takes from the West Line,
and it means a new route for European countries. Thus, Turkey has strengthened its position as a country that contributes to the energy security of Europe.
…
Turkey’s claim of being an energy hub has been strengthened by the TurkStream project, which enables the country to directly take the natural gas coming from the West Line.
TurkStream, which will be operated by a company established by BOTAS and Gazprom, is an important route for meeting the natural gas needs of Europe. The project, which increases
the mutual dependency between Ankara and Moscow, positively contributes to the advancement of cooperation for future relations between the countries. Thus, TurkStream is significant
for revealing that energy sources strengthen cooperation and ensure economic benefits rather than causing conflicts.
… Transmitting the annual 14 billion cubic meters of gas from the West Line to Turkey over the first line of TurkStream, without changing terms and conditions of the existing
agreements, means reducing this risk. Thus, gas will be directly transmitted from Russia to Turkey without the need for intermediate countries, and the problem of being exposed to
potential interruptions caused by third parties will be eliminated. As a result, Turkey’s energy security has increased with this project.
…
While TurkStream brings Ankara and Moscow closer, it also presents gains for Turkey concerning Syria and Libya, which are important issues of foreign policy. The progress and
increase in this cooperation will provide significant flexibility to Turkey in foreign policy.

OE Watch | March 2020

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Russia’s Outreach to the Kurdistan Regional Government
of Iraq
OE Watch Commentary: In the last decade,
Russia’s presence in the Middle East has
increased. One region over which Russia has
exerted its influence is the Kurdistan Regional
Government of Iraq (KRG). In 2017, Russian
state oil company Rosneft signed a deal to
develop the KRG’s oil and gas infrastructure
in a move that was not just commercial but
also sought to expand Russia’s political
influence in KRG and the Middle East. Russian
diplomats have since frequented the region. The
accompanying articles from Kurdistan24.net
provide insight into the recent visit by Mikhail
Bogdanov, Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister
and President Putin’s Special representative for
the Middle East and Africa, to the KRG.
Consulate-General of Russia in Erbil.
Bogdanov held meetings with the KRG
Source: http://www.rusgencons-erbil.mid.ru/img/ZD2_1.jpg via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Consulate-General_of_Russia_in_Arbil.jpg, CC-BY-3.0
President Nechirvan Barzani, Prime Minister
Masrour Barzani, and President of Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and former President of KRG Masoud Barzani. According to the article,
Bogdanov stated that the visit focused on bolstering Russian and KRG relations “especially economic ones.” The Russian diplomat also “discussed
the status of Russian energy giants operating in the Kurdistan Region.” While Russia’s third largest energy company Gazprom has been operating
in various Iraqi regions since 2010 and in the KRG since 2016, Rosneft has taken on major projects to modernize oil and gas infrastructure and
design “a new gas pipeline that could substantially boost oil production” in the KRG. Bogdanov also stated Moscow’s interest in encouraging
culture and knowledge exchange “to further develop investment opportunities between the Russian Federation and the Kurdistan Region.” He
also said he had discussed other important issues “including the unfolding situations in Iraq and neighboring Syria” without providing any details.

The second excerpted article discusses three reasons for Bogdanov’s visit. It cites the projects of Russian energy companies operating in the
KRG, pointing to the presence of Gazprom and Rosneft representatives in the meetings. Second, it notes the goal of advancing economic and
political relations between Russia and the KRG. Finally, the author claims that the visit was held to discuss the situation of the Kurds in Syria.
Bogdanov held a meeting with the Kurdish National Council (ENKS), a Syrian Kurdish party supported by the KRG. The article states that Russia
wants the former President of the KRG, Masoud Barzani, to play a role in bringing Kurdish parties in Syria together as Russia is trying to facilitate
a dialogue between them and the al-Assad regime. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“While some experts argue that the
first reason for Bogdanov’s visit to the
Kurdistan Region is Rojava, some say that
new political and commercial relations
are being discussed between Erbil and
Moscow...”

OE Watch | March 2020

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Russia’s Outreach to the Kurdistan Regional
Government of Iraq
Source: “Energy, economy lead talks between Kurdistan leaders, Russian official,” Kurdistan24.net, 30 January 2020. https://www.
kurdistan24.net/en/economy/7f30b31c-2a65-4756-a97c-7e938565d2f3
While finishing up an official visit to Erbil, a senior Russian diplomat said that the issue of bolstering ties to the Kurdistan Region, especially
economic ones, took center stage in two days of talks with top Kurdish leaders.
…
Bogdanov said during a press conference capping off his visit to Erbil that he had discussed the status of Russian energy giants operating in
the Kurdistan Region, covering various topics relevant to the economic and energy sectors.
Erbil and Moscow have deepened bilateral relations over the past few years, notably after the KRG signed an agreement with Russia’s state
oil company Rosneft to develop the region’s oil and gas infrastructure, including the design of a new gas pipeline that could substantially
boost oil production in the Kurdistan Region.
Meanwhile, Gazprom Neft, Russia’s third-largest oil producer, was the subject of talks as well. Gazprom first began operating in Iraq in 2010
in the southern province of Wasit before launching operations in Kurdistan.
…
He also said Moscow wants to encourage an exchange of culture and knowledge through university professors, doctors, and others “to
further develop investment opportunities between the Russian Federation and the Kurdistan Region.”
…
On Thursday, Deputy Foreign Minister Bogdanov noted that, during his visit, he had also discussed additional “important issues with the
Kurdish leadership,” including the unfolding situations in Iraq and neighboring Syria.

Source: Cesim İlhan, “K24 ÖZEL - Bogdanov’un Erbil ziyareti ne anlama geliyor? (K24 SPECIAL - What does Bogdanov’s visit to Erbil
mean?)” Kurdistan24.net, 2 February 2020. https://www.kurdistan24.net/tr/news/36570645-e95f-4db1-81dc-20ddf7c82be8
Putin’s Special Representative Mikhail Bogdanov coming to the Kurdistan Region without going to Baghdad first indicates new development
between Arbil and Moscow as well as Rojava…
The President of Russia Vladimir Putin’s Special Representative for the Middle East and Africa and Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail
Bogdanov came to the Kurdistan Region, without stopping at the capital of Iraq on January 29-30, where he met the President Masoud
Barzani, the President of the Kurdistan Region Nechirvan Barzani and the Prime Minister Masrour Barzani.
The meetings included representatives of Gazprom and Rosneft, who continue their activities in the oil and energy sector in the Kurdistan
Region.
Rosneft signed a 20-year agreement on oil and energy with the Kurdistan Region in May 2017. Gazprom has been operating in the Kurdistan
Region since 2016.
While some experts argue that the first reason for Bogdanov’s visit to the Kurdistan Region is Rojava, some say that new political and
commercial relations are being discussed between Erbil and Moscow...

RUSSIA MILITARY STRATEGY: IMPACTING 21ST CENTURY
REFORM AND GEOPOLITICS by TIMOTHY L. THOMAS
Russian military’s main tasks are to maintain the combat readiness of the Armed Forces and to
ensure the Russian Federation’s defensive capability. Russia’s military heritage will assist this process tremendously. Combat readiness includes updated strategic thought, new equipment revelations, and future-war projections. Defensive capability includes not just protecting Russia’s territory, but also the security of the nation’s national interests and conduct of geopolitics. Capturing
the essence of these developments is the goal of this book. In the process a few templates for
understanding Russian military thought and actions are offered for further consideration and use.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195605/download
OE Watch | March 2020

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Libya Conflict: Oil as the Latest Weapon

Libya Infrastructure Map.

Source: http://www.eia.gov via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Libya_infrastructure_map.png, Public domain

OE Watch Commentary: Nine years after an uprising
that eventually toppled Muammar Gaddafi after 42 years
in power, Libya remains deeply divided between two rival
administrations in the west and east of the country. In the
west, the UN-supported Government of National Accord
(GNA), led by Fayez al-Sarraj and based in Tripoli, controls
the capital and some of western Libya. However, the
Parliament, located in Tobruk in the east of the country, is
independent of the GNA and works closely with military
commander Khalifa Haftar, who controls the Libyan
National Army (LNA). The LNA is headquartered in the
city of Benghazi and controls much of eastern and southern
Libya, and its forces include Libyan army units, local militias
and tribesmen. As the first accompanying passages notes,
the dynamic of the conflict is also shaped by the support
of global players to the rival sides: “the participation of the
UAE, Saudi Arabia and Egypt on the side of Haftar... and
support from Turkey and Qatar for al-Sarraj’s GNA.” Since
April 2019, the GNA has been facing an offensive by the
LNA to take the capital. As the accompanying passages
discuss, oil is the newest weapon in this conflict.

While Commander Haftar and his Libya National Army (LNA) control the territories that house Libya’s oil fields and refineries, the income
from this oil goes into the coffers of the Government of National Accord (GNA) based in Tripoli. To protest this, Haftar’s forces recently halted
oil exports and shut down all oil terminals, causing the National Oil Corporation (NOC) to declare force majeure. As the second accompanying
passage notes, the LNA “is tasked with securing oil facilities. Yet all of the revenues generated from oil production go to the Tripoli-based and
UN-recognized NOC.” Haftar claims that the GNA is using this money to obtain mercenaries to fight against its forces. The passage quotes a tribal
leader affiliated with the LNA as saying that the closure of oil parts are “designed to dry up the sources of terrorism financing with oil revenues, in
reference to preventing the GNA from spending oil revenues on fighters coming from abroad.” The passage explains that the LNA demands a new,
“fair and transparent distribution of oil revenues,” in light of accusations that the GNA is “bringing in mercenaries to fight alongside its forces...”
As the passage highlights, the LNA’s position is that “oil ports will only open after the GNA is brought down, oil revenues are fairly distributed
and a caretaker government is formed.” The passage also points out that the GNA head Fayez al-Sarraj has refused this demand.
As the passage notes, for its part, “the Tripoli-based NOC indicated in a statement on 25 January, that the closure of oil ports and suspension of
oil operations dropped oil production to 320,000 barrels per day, down from 1.2 million barrels per day — a fall of 75%.” According to the third
passage from the Libya Observer, as of 12 February, the NOC estimated the losses at over $1.3 billion. In light of this, the NOC apparently issued a
statement calling for the LNA to “end the ‘irresponsible and illegal’ closings and to allow it to resume production operations immediately...” (Also
see: “Germany’s Wintershall and Libya to Conduct Joint Oil Exploration,” OE Watch, February 2020 and “Russia’s Increasing Military Presence
in Libya,” OE Watch, December 2019) End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Libya’s pro-LNA tribal leaders and notables
affirmed... that oil ports will only open after the GNA is
brought down, oil revenues are fairly distributed and a
caretaker government is formed.”
Source: Ruslan Mamedov, “Russia’s ‘Wait-and-See’ Policies and the Libyan Settlement,” Italian Institute for International Political Studies,
20 December 2019. https://www.ispionline.it/en/pubblicazione/russias-wait-and-see-policies-and-libyan-settlement-24692
For a long time at the regional level, the participation of the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Egypt on the side of Haftar, as well as support from
Turkey and Qatar for al-Sarraj’s GNA, explained the entire dynamic of the conflict.
OE Watch | March 2020

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Libya Conflict: Oil as the Latest Weapon

Khalifa Haftar.

Source: France24 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Khalifa_haftar_libya.jpg, CC BY-SA 4.0

Fayyez al-Sarraj.

Source:Brigitte N. Brantley via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fayez_
al-Sarraj_in_Washington_-_2017_(38751877521)_(cropped).jpg, CC BY 2.0

Source: George Mikhail, “Libyan divide deepens as eastern forces shut down oil ports,” Al Monitor, 2 February 2020. https://www.al-monitor.
com/pulse/originals/2020/01/libyans-resort-to-oil-to-demand-new-distribution-revenues.html
The Tripoli-based National Oil Corporation (NOC) declared Jan. 18 force majeure due to the closure of oil ports in eastern Libya, which the Libyan National Army
(LNA) controls.
The NOC accused the LNA, led by Field Marshal Khalifa Hifter, and affiliated Petroleum Facilities Guards of giving orders to halt oil exports from Libya’s oil ports of
Hariga, Brega, Ras Lanuf, Zueitina and Es Sider in the eastern part of the country.
The force majeure event exempts the NOC from liability in case it fails to fulfill its oil delivery obligations under the contracts.
In response to the US Embassy’s call for work resumption, the NOC replied Jan. 21 that oil operations would only resume when the closed ports in eastern Libya
reopen.
...
Speaking to Agence France-Presse, leader of the Zouaya tribe Mayor Senussi Haliq az-Zawi announced Jan. 17 the closure of oil ports, adding “it is designed to dry
up the sources of terrorism financing with oil revenues,” in reference to preventing the Government of National Accord (GNA) from spending oil revenues on fighters
coming from abroad.
The LNA, represented by the Petroleum Facilities Guard, is tasked with securing oil facilities. Yet all of the revenues generated from oil production go to the Tripolibased and UN-recognized NOC.
Libya’s oil industry is burdened with an institutional divide. While the Benghazi-based NOC is affiliated with the interim Libyan government, the Tripoli-based NOC is
recognized at the international level as an official institution authorized to conclude international oil contracts.
...
While the LNA’s demand consists of a new distribution of oil revenues, GNA head Fayez al-Sarraj rebuffed Hifter’s demand that the reopening of the closed oil ports in
eastern Libya be associated with a redistribution of oil revenues.
Libya’s pro-LNA tribal leaders and notables affirmed at their Jan. 24 meeting that oil ports will only open after the GNA is brought down, oil revenues are fairly
distributed and a caretaker government is formed.
The Tripoli-based NOC indicated in a statement Jan. 25 that the closure of oil ports and suspension of oil operations dropped oil production to 320,000 barrels per
day, down from 1.2 million barrels per day — a fall of 75%.
Youssef al-Aqouri, head of the parliamentary committee following up on the NOC performance, said the closure of some of the ports in eastern Libya is part of a
popular movement to demand a fair and transparent distribution of oil revenues. This is added to the demand that the GNA be held accountable for its spending,
particularly since it was accused of bringing in mercenaries to fight alongside its forces in cooperation with Turkey, he added.

Source: Sara Alharathy, “NOC: Oil shutdown losses exceed $1.3 billion,” Libya Observer, 12 February 2020. https://www.libyaobserver.ly/
inbrief/noc-oil-shutdown-losses-exceed-13-billion
NOC: Oil shutdown losses exceed $1.3 billion
After 22 days of closing oil facilities, the NOC estimates the losses to over one billion and 300 million dollars.... The NOC indicated in a statement Tuesday that the
closure of the Zawiya refinery would create problems related to the distribution and importing of fuel.
“The public treasury will bare additional expenditures for importing more quantities of fuel, in order to compensate for the refinery’s production,” the NOC explained.
The NOC renewed its calls to end the “irresponsible and illegal” closings and to allow it to resume production operations immediately, according to the statement.

OE Watch | March 2020

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Egypt Proposes Joint African Military Counterterrorism
Force

OE Watch Commentary: On 9 February, during the African Union
(AU) summit in Ethiopia, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi proposed
to hold an African summit to discuss establishing a joint African military
counterterrorism force. The proposal for a military force from within the
continent is noteworthy, specifically in light of the recent developments in
neighboring Libya, where a local conflict has become internationalized with an
increasing number of foreign powers intervening. The accompanying articles
from regional sources discuss this idea.
As the first article from the UAE-based The National notes, the proposed
African summit “to discuss a pan-African counterterrorism force” was Egypt’s
latest effort to create an international coalition to fight extremists. The passage
highlights some of the possible reasons behind this initiative, noting that “a
pan-African force could move against such groups based in Libya, which
Egypt blames for cross-border raids on security forces and its Coptic Christian
minority in recent years.” In addition, it could help fight against militants
in the sub-Sahara region who have been conducting increasing attacks. The
passage also notes that Egypt has been dealing with “a years-long insurgency
by militants concentrated in the northern part of the Sinai Peninsula.”

The second article discusses several other reasons. The passage notes that
Sisi’s pitch comes at a time when Egypt is seeking to boost its military presence
on the African continent. In fact, it points out that the Egyptian proposal
“coincided with Cairo hosting the chiefs of staff meeting of the armies of the
five Sahel countries — Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso” on
9 February. The article quotes a professor who claims that the proposal was
Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
welcomed by African countries in light of “Africa’s need of a military force
Source: Kremlin.ru via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Abdel_Fattah_el-Sisi.PNG, CC BY 3.0
from within the continent to confront terrorist threats,” and that they were
leaning on Egypt to implement it. A member of the African Affairs Committee points out that “African countries need a military force that
does not seek to achieve personal interests and goals within their territories — as is happening in Libya, in which a number of foreign powers
intervened under the pretext of fighting terrorism.”
Currently, the proposal has been referred to the African Peace and Security Council and the military and defense committees to discuss the matter
further. However, it is unclear how the force would operate and where its funding would come from. Furthermore, the idea has already faced
some pushback. As the final passage from Morocco World News reports, Moroccan Foreign Minister Nasser Bourita shot down Sisi’s proposal
and emphasized that what was needed was a “common African vision, in which each country contributes, yet with military independence.” (Also
see: “Libya Conflict: Oil as the New Weapon,” in this issue of OE Watch). End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“African countries need a military force that does
not seek to achieve personal interests and goals
within their territories — as is happening in Libya,
in which a number of foreign powers intervened
under the pretext of fighting terrorism.”

OE Watch | March 2020

44

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Egypt Proposes Joint African Military
Counterterrorism Force
Source: “Egyptian President Abdel Fattah El Sisi calls for African anti-terrorism force,” The National (UAE), 10 February 2020. https://www.
thenational.ae/world/africa/egyptian-president-abdel-fattah-el-sisi-calls-for-african-anti-terrorism-force-1.977259
Egyptian President Abdel Fattah El Sisi has called for a summit to discuss a pan-African counterterrorism force, his latest bid to create an
international coalition to fight extremists.
Mr El Sisi addressed leaders at the African Union gathering in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on Sunday, at which he also handed the rotating oneyear presidency to South African President Cyril Ramaphosa.
“Egypt is ready to host this special African summit out of its sense of responsibility and its belief in the importance of such a force in
establishing peace and security in Africa,” he said.
Mr El Sisi said the summit should lay down a “comprehensive vision” for counterterrorism and establishing peace and security across the
continent.					
...
A pan-African force could move against such groups based in Libya, which Egypt blames for cross-border raids on security forces and its
Coptic Christian minority in recent years.
It could also help with the fight against militants in the sub-Sahara region who have staged increasingly frequent and deadly attacks.
Egypt is dealing with a years-long insurgency by militants concentrated in the northern part of the Sinai Peninsula.
The insurgency has proved to be resilient, despite the superior firepower and size of the security forces, but the militants have been denied
control of large amounts of territory.
Source: George Mikhail, “Why is Egypt seeking African military force?” Al Monitor, 18 February 2020. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/
originals/2020/02/egypt-sisi-african-union-military-force-terrorism-turkey.html
During the African Union (AU) Summit in Ethiopia Feb. 9, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi put forward a proposal to hold an
African summit aimed at establishing a joint African military force to combat terrorism.
...
Egypt’s ambassador to Ethiopia and its permanent representative to the AU, Osama Abdel Khalek... said in a TV interview Feb. 9, “A
proposal to hold an African summit to discuss the establishment of an African military force was referred to the African Peace and Security
Council and the military and defense committees to discuss the matter from all sides.”
...
Egypt has been recently seeking to boost its presence on the African continent through the military and security axes, and the Egyptian
proposal to establish an African force to combat terrorism coincided with Cairo hosting Feb. 9 the chiefs of staff meeting of the armies of the
five Sahel countries — Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso.
...
Tarek Fahmy, a professor of political science at Cairo University, told Al-Monitor, “The African countries welcomed the Egyptian proposal
to form an African military force for several reasons, the most important of which is Africa’s need of a military force from within the continent
to confront terrorist threats.”
He added, “The African countries are leaning toward Egypt to implement that proposal, given the Egyptian army’s strength and experience
in confronting terrorism internally and externally through its participation in international peace-keeping forces, in addition to Cairo’s
membership in the African Peace and Security Council. Consequently it has the ability to put forward the proposal and discuss it within the
council.” ...
Representative of the parliamentary African Affairs Committee Majed Abu al-Khair told Al-Monitor, “African countries need a military force
that does not seek to achieve personal interests and goals within their territories — as is happening in Libya, in which a number of foreign
powers intervened under the pretext of fighting terrorism.”
Khair added, “Egypt is eligible to provide support and training in addition to sharing its experiences in confronting terrorism in the Sinai
Peninsula with African countries suffering from these terrorist crises.”
Source: “Morocco Rejects Egypt’s ‘Unified African Military’ Proposal,” Morocco World News, 11 February 2020. https://www.
moroccoworldnews.com/2020/02/293428/morocco-rejects-egypts-unified-african-military-proposal/
Morocco has shot down Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi’s vision of a unified African military force.
...
Morocco responded to the proposal yesterday, with Minister of Foreign Affairs Nasser Bourita arguing that cooperation among African
forces in the fight against terrorism is preferable to a continental merger. 										
...											
Bourita, citing Morocco’s experience in
more than 15 UN peacekeeping operations, stressed that it is better to create a “common African vision, in which each country contributes,
yet retain military independence.”
OE Watch | March 2020

45

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Speculation on Egyptian Cross-Border Military
Deployment
OE Watch Commentary: Critics of the Egyptian military call it a
paper tiger, a bloated bureaucracy spending extravagantly on modern
weaponry for political rather than military gain. They point to the
seemingly never-ending insurgency in the Sinai as a prime example of
the military’s shortcomings. Supporters of the Egyptian government see
things differently, and the start of 2020 witnessed a surge of nationalist
pride and fervor in the Egyptian press, following large-scale military
displays (“Qader 2020”) and the opening of “the largest military base on
the Red Sea” in Berenice (Baranis), just over 150 miles from the Saudi
port of Yanbu across the Red Sea. The area has served as a port since at
least the Hellenistic period and includes a promontory jutting east toward
the Saudi coast, called Ras Banas (Cape Banas); it also has an airport
that has been used by the Egyptian Air Force since the presidency of
Abdel Nasser in the 1960s.
The first excerpted passage argues that the Berenice base signals a
shift in Egypt’s strategic priorities, away from Israel and toward viewing
Islamist movements and their backers, most notably Turkey, as the key
strategic threat. The author argues that the new base will in part serve to
make it more difficult to implement the agreement by which Sudan was
to lease a Red Sea island to Turkey. An infamous Saudi Arabian insider,
who tweets critically from inside the Saudi royal family under the
handle @mujtahidd, claims that the Berenice base was in fact planned
by UAE leader Mohammed bin Zayed and Egyptian President Abdel
Fattah Sisi years ago, primarily to base a rapid deployment force that
can be mobilized a short distance across the Red Sea to secure Mecca
and Medina, in case “there is a failure in Saudi Arabia.” Whatever the
case may be, Saudi and Emirati involvement in the base was highlighted
by the presence of high-level delegations at the inauguration ceremony.
The Berenice base opened shortly after the surprise deployment of
Turkish military assets to back the Tripoli-based Government of National
Accord (GNA) in Libya. Turkish actions raised questions on whether
Egypt might deploy forces of its own to eastern Libya. In Arabiclanguage media, a slew of politicians, analysts, anonymous sources and
armchair strategists discussed scenarios by which the Egyptian military
would respond to Turkish deployments, only in support of the GNA’s
Red Sea Topographical Map.
Source: Eric Gaba via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Red_Sea_topographic_map-en.svg, CC BY-SA
adversary, the Khalifa Haftar-led Libyan National Army (LNA). Some
reports claimed that the UAE sought to entice Egyptian military deployment to Libya “with a huge economic package, in addition to bearing all the
costs of the battle there, while providing various other forms of support.” As the final accompanying passage notes, though, the Egyptian military
establishment “has from the start been opposed to the idea of military participation in the crisis and sought to maintain ties with all parties” in
Libya. In a move that has “brought great relief within the military establishment,” President Sisi recently reappointed Mahmoud Hegazy, former
Chief of Staff of the Egyptian Armed Forces, to head the Libya file. Still, as the article suggests, there is some degree of disagreement within
the Egyptian military about how to proceed in Libya, and continued Emirati encouragement for the Egyptian military to intervene directly may
exacerbate these disagreements. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“… There are significant tensions within Egyptian
institutions concerned with Libya …”

OE Watch | March 2020

46

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Speculation on Egyptian Cross-Border
Military Deployment
Source:
‫ما حقيقة دور قاعدة برنيس العسكرية التي افتتحها السييس؟‬
“What is the True Role of the Berenice Military Base Opened by Sisi?” Arabi21, 16 January 2019. https://tinyurl.com/wnf4mzs

Mahmoud Gamal, a researcher on military affairs at the Egyptian Institute for Political and Strategic Studies, confirmed that the military
base is not new as the regime claims, saying: “It is a military base that has merely been developed. It has been around for years, but since
mid-2018 Sisi has worked to develop it, like the Mohammed Naguib military base, which Sisi opened in the west of the country as the largest
military base in the Middle East, but which was also there before. The Egyptian regime, led by Sisi, is trying to create the appearance of
military success by making the people think it is building new military bases. This is not true, what is happening is merely the development
of existing rather than the construction of new bases.” He pointed out that “the location of those military bases, in the south and west of the
country, reveal a transformation of Egyptian military doctrine in recent years, no longer considering Israel the historical enemy. Since 2013,
the enemy has become political Islam, so we find it developing military bases, one towards Libya in the west and the other toward Sudan in the
south, which was at the time was linked to the Bashir regime before its downfall.”
Source: @Mujtahidd, Twitter, 20 January 2020. https://twitter.com/mujtahidd/status/1219170599597236224
The newly opened Egyptian Berenice base on the Red Sea has been ready for years, as part of a conspiracy between Sisi and bin Zayed.
The real goal is Sisi’s control of the two holy mosques, if there is a failure in Saudi Arabia. It hosts a rapid intervention force and a plan is in
place for air and sea landing in Jeddah and Yanbu on the way to Mecca and Medina.
The plan was drawn up since Sisi’s arrival to power in coordination with Israel and bin Zayed. After the Turks landed on Sawakin Island in
Sudan, Emirati-Israeli support doubled. Finally, bin Salman foolishly joined after bin Zayed convinced him to arm the region against Turkish
presence and ally with Israel.
Source:
‫فشل إمارايت بإقناع السييس بتدخّل عسكري مبارش يف ليبيا‬
“Emirati Failure to Convince Sisi to Intervene Militarily in Libya,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 28 January 2020. https://tinyurl.com/rux3q5j

According to the sources, Abu Dhabi and Riyadh linked the Egyptian administration’s approval of direct intervention in Libya with a huge
economic package, in addition to bearing all the costs of the battle there, while providing various other forms of support. This was clearly
rejected by the Egyptians, who stressed that they have provided all forms of logistical and military support for Haftar, across its borders,
without directly intervening. The sources indicated that in January, official institutions in Abu Dhabi hosted a number of writers, thinkers
and public figures who are influential in Egyptian decision-making, where they met with researchers and Emirati officials at various
research centers, one of them affiliated with the UAE Ministry of Defense. Their discussions focused on the pressing need for a decisive end
to the Libyan crisis and how this could only be achieved through the Egyptian army, which is the main stakeholder considering Libya is a
neighboring country that directly affects Egyptian national security and interests.
Source:
‫السييس يعيد حجازي إىل امللف الليبي ملواجهة غضب املؤسسة العسكرية‬
“Sisi Bring Hegazy Back to the Libya File to Calm Anger within the Military,” al-Araby al-Jadid, 8 January 2020. https://tinyurl.com/vvuv63a

Private Egyptian sources revealed to al-Araby al-Jadid that Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah Al-Sisi brought back former Egyptian Army
Chief of Staff, General Mahmoud Hegazy, to supervise the Libyan file. He has been chairing the Egyptian committee focused on this before
being removed in the wake of the Al-Wahat massacre in late 2017. According to sources that spoke to al-Araby al-Jadeed, there are significant
tensions within Egyptian institutions concerned with Libya. There is a strong faction within the military that rejects any direct military
intervention in Libya, and refuses to put the armed forces in a battle that may be a trap for them. The sources added that the media and digital
campaign to encourage Egyptian-Turkish military confrontation on Libyan soil has angered Egyptian regime insiders focused on the Libyan
file, saying that talking about war battles as a political endeavor or an internal political like the parliamentary elections, is unacceptable to
Sisi’s aides who manage the media…
The sources pointed out that the return of the experienced Hegazy to supervise the Libya file has brought great relief within the military
establishment, which has from the start been opposed to the idea of military participation in the crisis and sought to maintain ties with all
parties, including building strong relations with all tribes in the Libyan territories, hoping to position Egypt as an umbrella for all in a way
that helps preserve Egyptian interests in Libya, which has about a million and a half Egyptian workers.

OE Watch | March 2020

47

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Mauritania and the UAE’s Expanding Influence in the
West African Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: In the past year, the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) has deepened its ties with the governments
of Mali and Niger in the West African Sahel, through a
combination of financial and security assistance. In July 2019,
the UAE pledged one billion UAE Dirhams (approximately
$270 million USD) in financial assistance to the government of
Mali; in January 2020 it began delivering dozens of armored
vehicles to Malian security forces. In Niger, rumors surfaced
last summer that the UAE was negotiating to establish a
military base; the negotiations were purportedly put on hold in
September 2019 and have not been reported on since. Emirati
moves to expand its influence in the West African Sahel come
amidst a recent uptick in jihadist attacks, particularly in Mali,
Niger and Burkina Faso. The bloodiest so far this year was a
mid-January ISIS attack in Niger, near the Malian border, that
killed at least 89 government soldiers.
More recently, the UAE has focused on deepening
Source: Munion via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_the_Sahel.png, CC BY-SA 3.0
cooperation with the new Mauritanian President, Mohamed
Ould Ghazouani, who took office in August 2019 and made an official visit to Abu Dhabi in January 2020. The UAE’s ties to Mauritania have
deeper roots than those with Niger and Mali, partly because Mauritania is the only one of those three countries where Arabic is a widely spoken,
official government language (albeit a different dialect than in the UAE). Mauritania is known for producing quality Islamic scholars, and as
the accompanying excerpt explains, many of them have ended up in Emirati mosques. Under Ghazouani’s predecessor, Mohamed Ould Abdel
Aziz, Mauritania joined the UAE in the Saudi-led coalition fighting in Yemen and the 2017 boycott of Qatar, though its contributions to both
have been mostly symbolic. In 2016, Abu Dhabi financed the construction of a military education campus next to Nouakchott University, which
was named the Mohamed bin Zayed Defense College in a nod to its benefactor. In January 2020, Abu Dhabi pledged $2 billion for investment
and development projects in Mauritania. Some media outlets reported that discussions had also taken place for the UAE to build a military base
in north Mauritania. Although the rumor was officially denied by the Mauritanian government, it gained traction among media outlets opposed
to Emirati foreign policy. According to the accompanying excerpt from Arabi21, expanded Emirati security cooperation with Niger, Mali and
Mauritania has raised some eyebrows in Algeria, which shares a border with all three of those countries.
Map of the Sahel.

Emirati policy in the Sahel may mirror its approach to Yemen, which was characterized by pragmatism in its dealings with local forces and
a focus on securing a foothold in strategic and resource-rich locations. The Sahel countries, sub-Saharan Africa’s gateway to Europe, possess
significant untapped mineral wealth. Over the past few years, the UAE (specifically Dubai) has emerged as one of the largest importers of unrefined
African gold from several Western African countries, including Mali. Much of it is smuggled out of Africa without government approval, and
jihadist groups appear to be increasingly involved in the artisanal gold industry. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Mauritania denied hosting an Emirati
military base on its soil…”

OE Watch | March 2020

48

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Mauritania and the UAE’s Expanding Influence
in the West African Sahel
Source:
‫ عـالقـات تتجـدد‬..‫موريتانيا واإلمارات‬
“Mauritania and the Emirates… Renewed Relations,” al-Khaleej, 3 February 2020. http://www.alkhaleej.ae/alkhaleej/page/2b1bcfaa-0be6-487d-a9faae1f371cc219

Sheikh Zayed, may God have mercy on him, paid close attention to the great Mauritanian excellence in the field of Islamic sciences and
Arabic language. He was keen to embrace Mauritanian legal scholars and judges who enabled the Maliki school, which is the official doctrine
of the Emirates. This followed cooperation in various fields, and there were Mauritanian police missions that continue to serve Emirati
security, with some personnel still serving there today. Many Emirati mosques are led by Mauritanian imams.
Source:
‫موريتانيا تنفي إنشاء اإلمارات قاعدة عسكرية عىل أراضيها‬
“Mauritania Denies Construction of Emirati Military Base on its Territory,” Anadolu Agency, 30 January 2020. https://tinyurl.com/wm6k7ad

On Thursday [30 January], Mauritania denied hosting an Emirati military base on its soil. The official Mauritanian news agency quoted an
unnamed source in the Ministry of Defense as denying what he called “rumors which were covered by the media a few days ago about the
establishment of the UAE military base north of the country.” The source added that “Mauritania has close fraternal relations with the UAE
based on the principle of common interests and cooperation in all fields, including military cooperation.”

Source:
‫هل تسعى اإلمارات للتواجد يف شامل أفريقيا لدعم “حفرت”؟‬
“Does the UAE Seek a Presence in North Africa to Support Haftar?” Arabi21, 1 February 2020. https://tinyurl.com/sgcfbfd

… the Algerian newspaper “Patriotique Algérie” recently revealed that “the Abu Dhabi government is seeking to establish a base and a
military airport in northern Mauritania near the southern border of the state of Algeria.” The newspaper described the Emirati move as an
“attempt to encircle Algeria and a threat to its national security”… Ali Mounir Douala, an Algerian researcher in international relations,
stressed that “Algeria constantly rejects the idea of foreign military bases not only on its territory, but also in neighboring countries such as
Libya and Tunisia to the east, and Mali, Niger, and Mauritania to the south. Its recent position regarding Emirati activities, if it is indeed true,
will come from these principles”... Moroccan researcher and academic, Noureddine Lachhab, pointed out that “the UAE is not able to put
pressure on Algeria now, because the latter is still going through a transition, and the Algerian people are still mobilized. Even though the
Algerian political system has a military background, the army is a national army and not one of mercenaries, like some armies in the Arab
east, who live on American aid and dominate the economy…

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download

OE Watch | March 2020

49

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Shifting Dynamics in Yemen as Houthis Advance East of
Sana’a
OE Watch Commentary: When the Yemen war began in
2015, the stated goal of the Saudi-led coalition was to push the
Houthis out of Sana’a. Despite near-absolute control of the skies,
the Saudi-led coalition was unable to penetrate the capital. The
front dividing Sana’a and Marib, the key centers of gravity for
the Houthi-led military/Popular Committees and the Saudibacked Yemeni National Army respectively, has been largely
static since 2016. In mid-January 2020, a missile (attributed
to but never publicly claimed by the Houthis) struck a forward
base of the Saudi-backed forces, killing over 100 people. The
Houthis then began moving eastward toward Marib, pushing
their opponents out of Nihm District (Sana’a Province) and into
Marib and neighboring al-Jawf, in what Saudi-backed forces
described as a “tactical retreat.” The Houthis claimed that their
eastward advances were defensive, in response to attempted
incursions toward Sana’a by their adversaries.
There are many ways of viewing movement along this longstatic, key front, as noted in the accompanying passage from
the southern Yemeni newspaper Aden Ghad. The Houthis
themselves have emphasized the military element, with the
report claiming that they were able to take full control of
adversary communications networks “to the point that the
National Army’s 7th Military Zone and those fronts became
completely isolated.” In a lengthy press conference by their
military spokesman Yahya Saree, they also emphasized how
Advances in territorial control on the Nihm Front as presented by Houthi military spokesman.
Source: Yahya Saree Twitter account, https://twitter.com/army21ye/status/1222530400930738176/photo/1, Public Domain
their air defense systems, “including the Fater-1” (unveiled last
August and resembling a 3M9 missile from a Soviet-era 2K12 [SA-6] pre-Houthi Yemeni military air defense system), forced coalition aircraft
toward higher altitudes. The Houthis have recently been keen to emphasize their air defense capabilities.
Houthi military claims are often bombastic, and some in Yemen appear to believe that the “near-total absence of coalition aircraft” during
the offensive, as one newspaper described, was due less to Houthi capabilities than to a Saudi “conspiracy.” It does seem odd, as one of the
accompanying passage highlights, that the Saudi-led coalition’s media channels “completely ignored” this important battle. Some seem to believe
that Saudi Arabia is recalibrating its support for the National Army, which is plagued by corruption, driven by parochial interests and largely
controlled by the Islah Party. The Houthi offensive coincided with a visit to Riyadh by Tareq Saleh, nephew of former longtime Yemeni President
Ali Abdullah Saleh and leader of a reconstituted Yemeni Republican Guard, who has positioned himself to become Saudi Arabia’s new key partner
in Yemen, potentially at the expense of current leaders in Islah and the National Army.
The Houthi military spokesman concluded his press conference on the Houthi offensive by making direct appeals to the tribes and people of
Marib Province. The Yemeni conflict will be won through alliances and tribal politics, and it appears that the relationships between the major
players, at least in what was formerly North Yemen, may be up for a consequential realignment. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“This time the battle occurred with the neartotal absence of coalition aircraft.”

OE Watch | March 2020

50

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Shifting Dynamics in Yemen as Houthis
Advance East of Sana’a
Source:
‫ ما الذي يحاول أن يقوله كل طرف؟‬..‫ معارك جبهة نهم‬..‫تقرير يبحث يف أسباب وأبعاد تجدد املعارك يف جبهة نهم رشق العاصمة صنعاء‬
“Report on the Causes and Dimensions of Renewed Battles in the Nihm Front East of the Capital Sana’a,” Aden Ghad, 1 February 2020. http://adengd.net/
news/440574

Each side to the conflict, the Houthis and the Yemeni army - which some describe as being under the control of Islah - claims military and
field victories, without providing a clear picture of the clashes. With the exception of the Yemeni army’s admission that it has withdrawn
“tactically,” ambiguity still dominates the scene on the Nihm front...
According to military sources, one reason the Houthis made such progress was that they were able to penetrate the national army’s wireless
communications network and issue fake orders for them to withdraw. They also disrupted other communications networks and the Internet, to
the point that the National Army’s 7th Military Zone and those fronts became completely isolated…
The Houthi rebel group explained the motives that led them to escalate to this degree in Nihm, saying that things were going well between
them and the Islah Party, calm on the fronts and a joint call for the return of Yemeni fighters from the border with the Saudi Arabia, and
sensing the danger of the coalition’s project west of Taiz as well as the danger of targeting Yemeni unity.
They were therefore surprised by the unexpected attack on the Nihm front, with coalition air cover, despite the military understanding of a
truce between the two sides. This perspective sees an “Islah” army, so to speak, which is lethargic and has not shown any desire to fight on
the mountains of the Nihm front, despite the great military support that “Islah” fighters receive there.
This prompted the Arab coalition to abandon the Islah army in Marib and Nihm and turn to a military leader whose stock has risen recently
and who seems to be the alternative option for the alliance, namely Brigadier Tariq Saleh, commander of the “Republican Guard” forces and
the nephew of late Yemeni president Ali Abdullah Saleh.
Analysts adopting this perspective believe that meetings between Brigadier General Tariq and Saudi leaders in Riyadh a few days ago was
the beginning of this approach, adopted by the coalition to find an alternative to the government army, which is controlled by Islah…
Some analysts accuse the leaders of the Yemeni army, led by Minister of Defense, Major General Muhammad al-Maqdashi, of “ failing” to
prove their field military capabilities; his involvement in financial corruption is no longer hidden to anyone…
Source:
‫آخر تفاصيل ملحمة تحرير نهم ومعارك الجوف ومأرب‬
“Latest Details on the Epic Liberation of Nihm and the Battles of al-Jawf and Marib,” Yemeni Press, 31 January 2020. https://www.yemenipress.net/
archives/179416

“The military escalation in Nihm represented an attempt to attack our forces and advance to important locations. The aggressor aircraft
launched several raids on our forces, more than 250 in total.” He emphasized that Air Defense Forces participated in the Bunyan al-Marsous
operation and that the Fater System 1 played an important role in confusing military aircraft and preventing them from launching attacks. The
spokesman for the armed forces stated that after activating the air defense system, the aggressor aircraft resorted to launching high-altitude
raids so as not to be exposed to the Fater missiles. He said, “The air defense system succeeded in carrying out more than 25 operations to
prevent attacks and force their departure. The continued aggressor raids on the area of operations prompted our forces to respond decisively,
and the directives of the leadership were clear in hitting Saudi military installations and bases”…
He addressed the sons of Marib, saying, “History, sons of Marib, will preserve your place in its pages, just as we today preserve the place of
our ancestors in fighting occupiers and conquerors. Be on the side that corresponds with your history, and that responds to your brotherhood,
your uniqueness and your traditions.”
Source:
‫تراجع للقوات الحكومية يف نهم والحوثيون يسيطرون عىل جبل املنارة‬
“Government Forces Retreat in Nihm and the Houthis Control al-Manara Mountain,” al-Masdar, 22 January 2020. https://almasdaronline.com/
articles/176716

According to the source, this time the battle occurred with the near-total absence of coalition aircraft.
Source:
“Features of the Conspiracy in Nihm,” al-Mawqea Post, 28 January 2020. https://www.almawqeapost.net/special-pens/3914

‫مالمح املؤامرة عىل نهم‬

- Coalition aircraft were absent during the battle of Nihm and al-Jawf, except for symbolic strikes. They continued to fly while the Houthi
forces marched in dozens of convoys. One military leader described this on TV as tantamount to the aircraft protecting the Houthi
convoys.
- Coalition media channels completely ignored events in Nihm and al-Jawf, which were instead busy covering the news of Haftar in Libya…
The fall of Nihm is not a coincidence or a defeat in its true sense. It is the result of repeated wrong practices that the coalition adopted a
long time ago and for reasons that we all know, the most important of which is to weaken the legitimate government, taking over its decisionmaking, marginalizing its leaders, and assassinating or dismissing every national leader who opposes and denounces this absurdity.
OE Watch | March 2020

51

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Turkey to Build Fifth-Generation Stealth Fighter Jet
OE Watch Commentary: In the past decade Turkey’s
defense industry has thrived with the support of the
government, who set a goal to become fully self-sufficient
in the defense industry by 2023. Turkey also strives to
become a major arms producer and exporter in the region.
It has successfully produced military hardware and taken
on ambitious projects. One of those ambitious projects is to
produce Turkey’s first indigenous fighter, the TF-X which
was unveiled during the Paris Air Show in the summer of
2019. Turkish officials have repeatedly stated that it will
be ready to take off in the next five to six years and will
replace F-16 fighter jets. While the first accompanying
article from pro-government Daily Sabah forecasts that
the TF-X will fly by 2029, the second article from Ahval
argues that it is unlikely to be ready in the 2020s.
According to the first excerpted article, the project was
initially launched by Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI).
However, it was later taken over by TR Engine, a new
research and development center for turbo shaft engines,
founded in 2017 as a joint venture of Turkish defense
TF-X TAI Le Bourget 2019.
Source: JohnNewton8 via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TF-X_TAI_Le_Bourget_2019.jpg, CC-BY-SA-4.0
contractors BMC, TAI, and “SSTEK, a subsidiary of the
SSB [Presidency of Defense Industries]” to “incorporate various engine-related projects under a single umbrella.” The general manager of TR
Engine Osman Dur stated that the efforts to develop an engine are ongoing as the firm continues to negotiate with international partners. As
the article reports, “Turkey wants the TF-X project to be a multi-partnered program, like the one enjoyed by the F-35 fighter jet program.” This
partnership is not limited to companies which can deliver an engine. The project became a priority for Turkey especially after the delivery of F-35
fighter jets was halted.
The second article paints a pessimitice picture of Turkey’s ambitious plan to build the TF-X fifth generation fighter jet to replace F-16s. The
author points to several signs that lead him to conclude that Turkey is unlikely to deliver this project in the 2020s. One of these involves statements
of high-level Turkish officials regarding the completion timeline: In 2013, Turkey’s Defense Industry Undersecretary Murad Bayar said that
Turkey plans to replace F-16s with locally produced fighter jets by 2023. In November 2019, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stated that Turkey’s
indigenous TF-X fighter jet will be ready in the next five or six years. Next, the author provides insights from analysts indicating challenges that
Turkey faces in producing the TF-X fighter jet in the near future. The absence of Turkey’s domestic technological capabilities to produce an engine
for the fighter jet (and Turkey’s efforts to partner with foreign companies to produce one) is another indication. As a Turkish defense analyst quoted
in the article says, it is “impossible to talk about a fifth-generation fighter [jet] without a fifth-generation engine.” End OE Watch Commentary
(Gündüz)

“Turkey’s bid to build a fifth-generation
stealth fighter is behind schedule and the
warplanes might not even get off the ground by
the end of the decade.”

OE Watch | March 2020

52

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Turkey to Build Fifth-Generation Stealth
Fighter Jet
Source: “Homegrown fighter jet to fly with domestic engine by 2029” Dailysabah.com, 10 January 2020. https://www.dailysabah.com/
defense/2020/01/10/homegrown-fighter-jet-to-fly-with-domestic-engine-by-2029
Turkey’s TF-X National Combat Aircraft (MMU) – a joint project by the Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) and Presidency of Defense
Industries (SSB) – is preparing for a maiden flight using a domestic engine in 2029.
Work to develop the engine continues at full speed, in cooperation with related institutions, according to Osman Dur, general manager of TR
Engine, a new research and development (R&D) center for turboshaft engines.
…
The MMU is a fifth-generation jet with similar features to Lockheed Martin’s F-35 Lightning II. The domestically-built aircraft is being
developed to replace the Turkish Air Forces Command’s F-16 fighters, ahead of the gradual phasing out of the latter throughout the 2030s.
…
The project to develop domestic capabilities to manufacture national jet fighter engines was initially launched by TAI but was later taken on
by TR Engine, a company established in 2017 by the SSB to incorporate various engine-related projects under a single umbrella. Around 55%
of the company is owned by Turkish defense contractor BMC, while TAI has a 35% stake. SSTEK, a subsidiary of the SSB, also has a 10%
share in TR Engine.
… the General Manager of the group Osman Dur said the firm had been negotiating with international engineering and design firms, along
with Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM)
…
Turkey wants the TF-X project to be a multi-partnered program, like the one enjoyed by the F-35 fighter jet program. Other countries,
especially in the Asia-Pacific, such as Malaysia, are being considered potential partners in the project by Ankara…

Source: Paul Iddon, “Turkey’s TF-X fighter unlikely to get off the ground in the 2020s” Ahval News, 16 January 2020. https://ahvalnews.com/
tf-x/turkeys-tf-x-fighter-unlikely-get-ground-2020s
Turkey’s bid to build a fifth-generation stealth fighter is behind schedule and the warplanes might not even get off the ground by the end of
the decade.
Turkey is aiming to become a major arms producer…
Turkey’s defense undersecretary said in 2013 it would replace its fleet of F-16s with newer domestically made fighters by 2023. In November,
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said Turkey’s own TF-X fifth generation fighter jet would be ready for flight in the next five or six years. But
even that later target looks unlikely to be met.
“For Turkey to develop a truly capable fifth-generation fighter would be a huge challenge, especially in just five years,” said Michael Peck, a
writer who covers defense issues for the National Interest magazine.
Justin Bronk, a research fellow who specializes in combat air power and technology at the London-based Royal United Services Institute
think tank, said the idea that Turkey could develop and field a functional fifth-generation jet fighter within a decade “is fantasy”.
Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu said in December that Turkey was seeking to revive a deal with Rolls-Royce to jointly produce
engines for the aircraft. The British company said in March last year that it had scaled back its participation in the TF-X project as it was
unwilling to share its intellectual property with Turkish vehicle manufacturer BMC…
Levent Özgül, a defense analyst for BlueMelange Consultancy, said it was impossible to talk about a fifth-generation fighter without a fifthgeneration engine. Even Rolls-Royce, he said, lacks the technology to build one.
“Turkey will struggle more than any of these given its lack of domestic experience and intellectual property in building combat aircraft,”
Bronk said.

OE Watch | March 2020

53

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Israeli Defense Forces to Increase Integration, Agility and
Lethality
OE Watch Commentary: In early February, the Israeli
Defense Forces (IDF) conducted an extensive four-day military
exercise simulating a multi-front conflict. The exercise came
a week after Israeli Defense Minister Bennett approved the
‘Momentum Plan,’ intended to increase the agility and lethality
of the IDF. The accompanying excerpts from Israeli sources
examine the military exercise as well as the new ‘Momentum
Plan.’
As the first article from the Times of Israel points out, the
drills included multiple parts of the IDF including, “Northern
Command, Southern Command, Ground Forces, Air Force,
Navy, Intelligence Directorate, and Telecommunications and the
Cyber Defense Directorate.” While the IDF said that the exercise
was “not tied to a new, specific threat,” it was likely tied to the
risk of simultaneously facing multiple old threats: Hezbollah in
Lebanon, Hamas in the Gaza Strip and attacks from Syria. The
drill was called a “headquarters exercise” as it focused on the
administrative facets of war, like interdepartmental planning
and communication.

Armored Corps Operate Near the Gaza Border.

Source: Israeli Defense Forces via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Armored_Corps_Operate_Near_the_Gaza_Border_(14753318081).jpg,
CC BY 2.0

The military exercise came a week after Israeli Defense Minister Bennett approved the Momentum Plan. As stated in the second article from
Jerusalem Post, the Momentum Plan, created by IDF Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Aviv Kochavi, will provide the IDF with an additional two
billion Israeli Shekels ($584 million) over several yars. Moreover, Bennett stated, “At the heart of the plan is the principle of defeating the enemy
quickly and powerfully, in the face of many complex arenas.” In 2019 the IDF spent approximately 11.6 billion Shekels (~$3 billion) on equipment
such as “the new Sa’ar 6 missile ships, active protection systems for the Eitan armored personnel carrier” in addition to upgrading the cyber and
digital capabilities of the army. As stated by the article from I24 News, the Momentum Plan will create a new multi-dimensional combat unit
intended to destroy enemy forces on all fronts. The new unit will test new fighting techniques and tactics before the tactics are introduced to the
rest of the IDF. The Israeli news site Arutz Sheva noted the unit will include paratroopers, reconnaissance units, combat engineering units, Israeli
Air Force pilots, and special forces from the Duvdevan and Oketz units. Over the next decade, the IDF intends to further expand the integration of
different branches of the military into single combined units in order to neutralize opposing militaries’ capabilities more rapidly. End OE Watch
Commentary (Fesen)

“At the heart of the plan is the principle of
defeating the enemy quickly and powerfully,
in the face of many complex arenas.”
Source: Judah Ari Gross, “IDF launches drill simulating multi-front war,” Times of Israel, 2 February 2020. https://www.timesofisrael.com/
idf-launches-drill-simulating-multi-front-war/
The Israel Defense Forces on Sunday launched a large-scale exercise simulating a war on multiple fronts, with units throughout the military
taking part, the army said.
The four-day drill will be held as a “headquarters exercise,” the IDF said, meaning it will focus on the more administrative aspects of such
a war…
The purpose of the exercise is to test and improve the communication between different parts of the military, wartime operations, and
interdepartmental planning, the IDF said.
...Northern Command, Southern Command, Ground Forces, Air Force, Navy, Intelligence Directorate, and Telecommunications and Cyber
Defense Directorate will take part in the drill.
...The military said it was planned in advance and is therefore not tied to a new, specific threat.

OE Watch | March 2020

54

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Israeli Defense Forces to Increase Integration,
Agility and Lethality
Source: Anna Ahronheim, “Defense Minister Bennett approves Momentum multi-year plan,” Jerusalem Post, 26 January 2020. https://www.
jpost.com/Israel-News/Defense-Minister-Bennett-approves-IDFs-Momentum-multi-year-plan-615410
Defense Minister Naftali Bennett approved on Sunday the IDF’s multi-year Momentum Plan, formulated by Chief of Staff Lt.-Gen. Aviv
Kochavi to make the military “more flexible, smarter and deadlier.”
“At the heart of the plan is the principle of defeating the enemy quickly and powerfully, in the face of many complex arenas.”
Meanwhile, the Defense Ministry said Sunday that NIS 11.6 billion has been purchased from Israeli companies over the past year to increase
the IDF’s lethality.
Among the most prominent procurement projects...include weapon systems for the new Sa’ar 6 missile ships, active protection systems for the
Eitan armored personnel carrier, ammunition for infantry units, as well as technological projects for the IDF’s “digital army”...

Source: “IDF unveils new, revolutionary multi-faceted combat unit,” I24 News, 01 January 2020. https://www.i24news.tv/en/news/israel/
diplomacy-defense/1577894720-idf-unveils-new-revolutionary-multi-faceted-combat-unit
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have revealed a new version of a combat unit...to serve as a testing ground for new fighting techniques and
tactics
This multi-dimensional unit is part of IDF Chief of Staff Aviv Kohavi’s multi-year Tenufa (Momentum) Plan
“Its members are meant to know how to operate in all fronts of the war...and the ability to locate, attack and destroy the enemy in all regions
and on all levels,” the military said.

Source: Kobi Finkler, “IDF launches new combat unit,” Arutz Sheva, 1 January 2020. http://www.israelnationalnews.com/News/News.
aspx/273960
Soldiers for the unit will be drawn from... paratroopers... reconnaissance units, the Armored Corps, army engineers, Air Force pilots, and
Special Forces units include Duvdevan and Oketz.
...the new unit is based around the IDF’s new “operating concept for the next decade – to hit the enemy in a shorter period of time, and to
neutralize its capabilities.”
Part of the new unit’s purpose is to help the army establish a framework for integrating various forces from various branches of the IDF
“and to build them…into a unified force...

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | March 2020

55

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Increasing Domestic Production of Rare Earth
Elements
OE Watch Commentary: The 17 rare earth
elements—15 lanthanides on the Periodic Table of
Elements as well as scandium and yttrium—are
increasingly important in industrial manufacturing
as catalysts and in magnets, and play an import role
in petroleum manufacturing. Despite their name,
they are not all rare. Cerium, for example, is the
25th most common element in the earth’s crust,
more abundant than copper. Part of the reason for
their ‘rarity,’ however, is that they are seldom found
in concentrations of ore that make mining easy or
profitable. China is the world’s largest supplier of rare
earth elements, but has sought to control the market
first with export quotas (which the World Trade
Organization deemed illegal in a 2014 ruling) and
more recently via export licenses. (For a foundational
understanding on rare earth and security issues, see:
Cindy Hurst, “China’s Rare Earth Element Industry:
What Can the West Learn?” Foreign Military Studies
Office, March 2010, https://community.apan. org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/237820.)

Ytterbium, used in production of higher-grade stainless steel and in nuclear medicine, is one of the rare earth

elements Iran must now import.
Many companies have turned elsewhere in order
Source: images-of-elements.com/ytterbium.php, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/ce/Ytterbium-3.jpg, CC BY 1.0
to diversify the market and reduce China’s leverage
over rare earths, but with mixed results. It is against this backdrop that the Mehr News Agency, an outlet owned by Iran’s Islamic Ideology
Dissemination Organization, reports on Iranian attempts to produce its own exploitable concentrations of rare earth elements. In the excerpted
article, Iranian Vice President Sorena Sattari, a scientist and mechanical engineer, suggests that Iran’s motivation is largely financial: Iran spends
over $3.5 million importing rare earths annually. This amount may seem a pittance compared to an annual Iranian budget of over $100 billion, so
Sattari’s motivation may be more strategic than economic. The Islamic Republic has deliberately built its own indigenous industries in order to
avoid dependence on outside powers or vulnerability to sanctions. As the United States and international community tighten sanctions on Tehran,
Iranian authorities might fear that future sanctions could hamper their ability to import rare earth elements, an event that could adversely impact
Iran’s refining and domestic electronics production. As such, Iranian authorities might see building plants to extract and concentrate rare earth
elements to be a growing priority. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“We are pursuing investments to build an industrial
scale rare earths extraction plant.”
Source: “Varadat-e Salaneh 200 Ton ‘Anasar-e Kamiyab-e Khaki (Annual Import of 200 Tons of Rare Earth Elements),” Mehr News Agency,
28 January 2020. https://www.mehrnews.com/news/4838176
Annual Import of Rare Earth Elements
Sorena Sattari [Iran’s vice president for science and technology], on Tuesday morning [January 28] at the inauguration ceremony of a pilot
plant to extract trace and strategic elements at the Iranian Mineral Processing Research Center in Savojbolagh County [in Alborz province in
northern Iran], and told reporters, “Crude mining prevents processing and extraction of rare earth elements.” He noted that about 200 tons
of these elements enter the country annually, and said, “The price of these per kilo is over $20.”
The Vice President for Science and Technology said, “With the extraction and processing of trace and other strategic elements, production
capacity increases and creates value, and it should be said for comparison, we sell one ton of limestone for $20, and the price of one kilogram
of these imported rare earth elements is $20.”
Sattari expressed happiness that the technology is indigenous to the country, and said, “We are pursuing investments to build an industrial
scale plant, and we hope that this will occur soon.”

OE Watch | March 2020

56

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Counterfeit Bank Notes Seized in Iran
OE Watch Commentary: The Islamic Republic of
Iran has long suffered from high inflation, and faces
32 percent inflation in consumer goods in 2020. The
Iranian currency has also devalued significantly. In
1979, the year of the Islamic Revolution, one US
dollar bought 70 rials. Today, the exchange rate is
over 42,000 rials to the dollar. Such devaluation
has caused Iran to issue a series of ever-higher
denomination bank notes. The Central Bank of Iran,
for example, introduced a 200-rial bank note in 1982,
and a 10,000-rial bank note a decade later. In 2007, a
50,000-rial bank note entered circulation.
The necessity of commerce required higher bills,
but the Iranian government has been reluctant
to acknowledge hyperinflation and print the
denominations of bills necessary to ease transactions.
For the past decade, the highest-circulation bill has
Iran’s 500,000 rial bank check, worth around $12.00 in January 2020.
Source: Toranji.ir, https://toranji.ir/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Iran-Cheque-50-2.jpg
only been a 100,000-rial note, worth less than $2.50.
While many countries facing similar financial difficulties would turn to the US dollar or Euro, Iran’s revolutionary ideology would forbid this, even
if it were not for the impediments caused by US financial sanctions. In order to bypass the psychological impact of higher banknotes, the Central
Bank has begun issuing “bank checks” in denominations of 500,000 rials and one million rials which circulate as currency.
In practice, these are easier to produce and, while they do have some safeguards against counterfeiting, they do not have the same level of
security features as ordinary currency. In addition, higher denomination notes are often more tempting for counterfeiters to seek to copy. The
excerpted article from an Iranian straight news portal reports on the seizure of 11 counterfeit 500,000 bank notes during a traffic stop in the
Western Iranian city of Kermanshah.
While this episode is by itself minor and the contraband checks represent just over $130, it likely signals a more widespread problem as no
counterfeiter produces only 11 copies of a product. Nor does the news report suggest that the two individuals arrested for possession of counterfeit
checks were the actual counterfeiters. That suggests that the Iranian security forces have not yet identified those responsible for the counterfeit
checks.
As the Iranian economy continues to deteriorate—the United Nations has forecasted a 2.7 percent recession in Iran for 2020—counterfeit
checks could further undercut local confidence in the economy. The lack of confidence could also extend to Iraq (to which Kermanshah is on the
road) which still conducts heavy trade with Iran and remains a major Iranian trading partner. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Agents found 11 fake 500,000-rial bank checks.”
Source: “Kashaf bish az 5 Miliyon Rial Chek Pul Taghlibi dar Kermanshah (Discovery of more than 5 Million Rials in Counterfeit Checks in
Kermanshah),” Fartak News, 29 January 2020. https://cutt.ly/4rUU0Gs
“Discovery of More than 5 Million Rials in Counterfeit Checks”
Colonel Hussein Barari stated, “While patrolling the western belt [road], a Kermanshah district rescue squad patrol stopped a Peugeot with
two suspicious passengers after a short chase.” He continued, “On inspection of this vehicle, agents found 11 fake 500,000-rial bank checks,
with the total counterfeit amount of 5.5 million rials [$131]. Colonel Barari noted that, “In this regard, the two defendants were arrested and
handed over to the judiciary for the necessary punishments.”

OE Watch | March 2020

57

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Solar Power Plant Opens in Tehran Province
OE Watch Commentary: On 29 January 2020,
the Tehran provincial government opened two solar
power plants in the Rey and Damavand counties, in
theory, the largest Iranian solar energy plants to date.
According to Deputy Energy Minister Mohammed
Sadeqzadeh, the Hasanabad plant (located about 35
miles south of Tehran) can produce 12.7 megawatts
of power, while the Damavand power plant (located
about 50 miles to the east of Tehran) can, according
to the excerpted press release, produce 10 megawatts,
although most other Iranian press on the opening
says the Damavand plant has only an 8.4 megawatt
capacity. Despite the fanfare, these solar plants
represent a drop in the bucket for Iranian energy
generation needs. To put this in perspective, the
Bushehr nuclear plant has a capacity of 915 megawatts
and Iran operates more than 15 fossil fuel-operated
power plants with capacities of 1,000 megawatts
or more, five of which have capacities above 2,000
megawatts.

A new solar plant has opened in Hasanabad, a rural area in southern Tehran province.
Source: Tasnim News, https://newsmedia.tasnimnews.com/Tasnim/Uploaded/Image/1398/05/12/1398051213060670518023074.jpg

The Tehran government’s new emphasis on solar power likely has several motivations. Tehran is one of the most polluted cities on earth (see:
“Tehran’s Losing Battle with Air Pollution,” OE Watch, June 2012). In January 2020, Tehran ordered its schools closed for a week due to severe
air pollution. Iranian authorities hope that solar power plants will ultimately reduce air pollution caused by burning fossil fuels. In the press
release, Sadeqzadeh also highlights savings in both gas and water, likely reflecting vulnerabilities in Iran’s energy sector. Iran only refines about
60 percent of the gas it needs for domestic consumption. While much gas is utilized for transportation, Iran also needs gas and water to inject into
declining oil fields to aid extraction. Therefore, Iran is dependent on imports of gasoline both to extract oil and produce electricity. Because US
and international sanctions have eaten into Iran’s hard currency reserves, Iranian officials may hope that an indigenous solar industry might also
help it stem expenditure. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The Hasanabad power plant is the first
solar-powered plant in the province.”
Source: “Iftitah Nirugah Hasanabad Fashapuyeh” (Opening of the Fashapuyeh Hasanabad Power Plant),” Website of the Government of
Tehran Province, 29 January 2020. tiny.cc/13ngjz
Opening of the Fashapuyeh Hasanabad Power Plant
According to the public affairs office of the Tehran provincial governor’s office, Mohammed Sadeqzadeh spoke today at the inauguration
ceremony of the Hasanabad Power Plant in Rey city via a video conference from the President’s office, and he pointed to the capacity of the
Hasanabad Plant, and stated, “This power plant has a total capacity of 12.7 megawatts, and the Damavand power plant has a capacity of 10
megawatts and is the largest solar plant in Tehran province, and is the 55th renewable power plant to be opened in this state.”
He said, “The construction of this power plant will result in 13 million cubic meters in gas savings and 9,000 cubic meters of water savings
per year.” The Deputy Minister of Energy added, “The inauguration of the plant will also remove 29,000 tons of environmental pollutants,
and a total of 127 billion tomans [$30.2 million] has also been invested in them.” Sadeqzadeh continued, “The Hasanabad power plant is also
the first solar-powered plant in the province that is opened on a megawatt scale, and the technology for these plants will be transferred to the
country, and today we are self-sufficient in the construction of these plants, and there is also a plant for the production of solar panels and
panels and other related equipment in the country.”

OE Watch | March 2020

58

AFRICA
Shiny Metals for Shiny Arms: Russia and Mozambique’s
Trade Agreement
OE Watch Commentary: As the accompanying article
from the Zimbabwe Independent reports, Zimbabwe’s
President Emmerson Mnangagwa has entered into a “murky
and opaque” deal with Russia, whereby his country will
trade some of its vast mineral wealth for new armaments.
He claims that the aim is to improve Zimbabwe’s antiquated
military. According to the passage, the amount involved is
staggering, with $3 billion worth of Zimbabwean platinum
funding the purchase of various Russian items, including
fighter jets. Another such deal in the works involves
Talneft, Russia’s state-owned petroleum and gas company,
eyeing Zimbabwe’s diamond riches in exchange for helping
to relieve Zimbabwe’s severe fuel shortage.
As the passage demonstrates, critics are quick to point
out that the amount being spent on weapons by Zimbabwe
is disproportionate to the needs of a country its size. The
Presidents Mnangagwa and Putin during talks promoting bilateral trade between their two countries,
15 January 2019.
ruling elite has been accused of corruption, with a history
Source: Kremlin.ru, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/59679, CC BY 4.0
of past questionable deals, such as arms shipments from
Chinese arms-manufacturer Norinco in exchange for mineral rights. The fact that business tycoon Kuda Tagwirei, who controls Zimbabwe’s entire
fuel industry, was in Russia when the recent deals were negotiated, adds to the suspicions.
Zimbabweans associated with organizations devoted to good governance note that there are times when trading minerals or mineral rights can
be appropriate for a country, with funding for infrastructure such as railroads being an example. However, as these individuals note in the article,
these weapons-for-minerals deals have only resulted in riches for the kleptocracy. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Recent revelations that [the] government is mortgaging the country’s

mineral wealth to Russian companies in exchange for arms and fuel are
a damning indictment on the authorities’ penchant for murky and opaque
deals in which strategic national resources are abused by the rich and the
ruling elite at the expense of the citizenry.”
Source: Andrew Kunambura, “Mortgaging of minerals for arms a misplaced priority,” Zimbabwe Independent, 7 February 2020. https://www.
theindependent.co.zw/2020/02/07/mortgaging-of-minerals-for-arms-a-misplaced-priority/
Recent revelations that government is mortgaging the country’s mineral wealth to Russian companies in exchange for arms and fuel are a
damning indictment on the authorities’ penchant for murky and opaque deals in which strategic national resources are abused by the rich and
the ruling elite at the expense of the citizenry.
Public policy expert Tawanda Zinyama rightly notes: “If this is real, then I think the Russians cannot believe their luck. This is a huge
bargain on their part.”
“Whilst government has a duty to ensure our military is well equipped for the purpose of national security, I think the biggest security threat
we are facing now is a failing economy which is in urgent need of capital injection. Government must consult citizens and stakeholders on
strategies for an economic turnaround and setting of priorities.”
The deal is seen as part of Zimbabwe’s efforts to revamp its antiquated military hardware, although government critics have said it is an
attempt by President Emmerson Mnangagwa to consolidate power by strengthening the state’s military might, given that he has not hesitated
to make full use of the troops even at the slightest threat.

OE Watch | March 2020

59

AFRICA
Kenya Weighs Whether to Keep Forces in Somalia Against
Al-Shabaab
OE Watch Commentary: Al-Shabaab’s attack on the Mandu Bay
Airfield in Kenya, which left an American servicemember and two
American contractors dead during the first half of January has been
widely reported. Less well known is that during the same timeframe, the
Somali-based terrorist group launched four other attacks against Kenya.
Indeed, as the accompanying article from the South African Institute for
Security Studies reports, over the last ten years, the main target of alShaabab attacks outside Somalia has been Kenya, resulting in over 600
dead and thousands injured. With al-Shabaab threatening more attacks
as long as Kenyan forces remain in Somalia, the big question for Kenya
now is whether it will withdraw those forces.
Kenyan forces first deployed to Somalia in October 2011. The goal
was to create a buffer zone by pushing back al-Shabaab. Several months
later, Kenya joined five other nations that had earlier formed the African
Union Mission in Somalia, AMISOM. With AMISOM set to withdraw
by 2021, Kenya faces a difficult choice: withdraw along with AMISOM
or break ranks and stay?

Kenya Defense Force troops attached to AMISOM serving in Somalia. In the near future
Kenya will have to decide whether its forces should leave Somalia when AMISON does.
Source: AMISOM/Flickr/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amisom_KDF_Troops_In_Kismayo_Take_Rotation_010.jpg_
(15982704285).jpg, Public Domain

Both scenarios have their positives and negatives. If Kenyan forces leave Somalia, al-Shabaab might stop launching attacks on Kenyan soil,
though leaving also means the buffer zone between the nations could collapse. If they stay, Kenya would be able to engage al-Shabaab on Somali
soil, perhaps lessening the group’s threat to Kenya by maintaining the buffer zone. But remaining would also mean that al-Shabaab would continue
to target Kenya. There are additional factors that complicate Kenya’s difficult decision. Budgetary constraints make it difficult to maintain troops
in Somalia, an option that also raises questions of legitimacy from an international law perspective. If they withdraw, there is no guarantee that
al-Shabaab will stop targeting Kenya or recruiting and radicalizing new members on Kenyan soil.
Thus, Kenya faces a dilemma. The article, in mentioning possible soft power alternatives, provides some useful statistics on the topic: among
the terrorist groups that existed between 1968 and 2006, only 7% of them ended their activities following military force. This is in contrast to 43%
that did so following negotiations. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“If the AU mission ends as planned, Kenya will be faced with two possible
scenarios. Either it goes along with the AMISOM withdrawal strategy –
which hopefully means al-Shabaab stops its attacks on Kenyan soil – or it
breaks ranks with the AU and its member states and remains in Somalia
unilaterally despite al-Shabaab threats to stage more attacks in 2020.”

Source: Mohamed Daghar, Duncan E Omondo Gumba, and Akinola Olojo, “Somalia, terrorism, and Kenya’s security dilemma,” Institute for
Security Studies, 22 January 2020. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/somalia-terrorism-and-kenyas-security-dilemma
Al-Shabaab has warned of more attacks in Kenya. In these statements one key message has remained consistent over the years: Kenya should
remove its troops from Somalia if it ever wants peace with al-Shabaab. If it fails to do so, ‘its streets will continue to be filled with rivers of
blood of its own people’, said an al-Shabaab statement following the high-profile Westgate Mall attack in 2013.
If the AU mission ends as planned, Kenya will be faced with two possible scenarios. Either it goes along with the AMISOM withdrawal
strategy – which hopefully means al-Shabaab stops its attacks on Kenyan soil – or it breaks ranks with the AU and its member states and
remains in Somalia unilaterally despite al-Shabaab threats to stage more attacks in 2020.
Whatever action Kenya opts for in the absence of a ‘ formal agreement’ with al-Shabaab, which remains remote for now, there is neither a
guarantee that terror attacks will cease nor an indication that the group will halt the recruitment of radicalised Kenyans. This is because the
attacks as well as the constant need to fill membership ranks beyond Somalia have earned al-Shabaab visibility.

OE Watch | March 2020

60

AFRICA
Burkina Faso: Fertile Soil for Homegrown Terrorists
OE Watch Commentary: Terrorist attacks inside Burkina Faso
were historically conducted by groups based in neighboring countries,
particularly Mali and Niger. However, as the accompanying article
from The Conversation Africa notes, in recent years, Burkina Faso
has witnessed terrorist organizations emerge within its own borders.
The first such group of significance was Ansar ul Islam, responsible
for a 2016 attack on a military post that resulted in the deaths of a
dozen members of the national defense and security forces.
Ansar ul Islam and several small militant groups eventually began
working together under the Group to Support Islam and Muslims
(GSIM), a jihadist organization in West Africa and the Maghreb.
GSIM, which is known by several additional names, enabled these
smaller groups to continue their trafficking and criminal activities by
providing them protection. GSIM’s logistical and technical support
also allowed them to launch more complex attacks.
These homegrown terrorist groups have mostly established
themselves, often with very little resistance from the locals, in rural
areas. There are several reasons for this, beginning with the absence
of government in these locations. Additionally, many rural people have a negative view of the government, a view reinforced by human rights
abuses committed by defense forces. As the passage notes, Ansar ul Islam used rhetoric “based on the fight against social inequality, injustices
and poor governance. Its rhetoric – which targets security forces and the state – resonated with people in these areas.”
Burkina Faso soldiers during a military exercise.

Source: Spc. Britany Slessman/AFRICOM/Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flintlock_2017_small_unit_tactics_training_in_
Burkina_Faso_170301-A-ZF167-075.jpg, Public Domain

Thus, the absence of government in some areas enables terrorist organizations to take hold, whereas the presence of government – often corrupt
and abusive – enables terrorist organizations to flourish in others. The article claims that, in order to counteract the growing threat of domestic
terrorists, the state must find a way to change its relationship with its rural people. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“The combination of poverty, a lack of public services,
security forces’ inefficiency and neighboring countries’
instability has contributed to the growing radicalization of
civil populations in Burkina Faso.”
Source: Mahamoudou Savadogo, “The changing face of Burkina Faso’s terrorist threat,” The Conversation Africa, 27 January 2020. https://
theconversation.com/the-changing-face-of-burkina-fasos-terrorist-threat-130267
Unlike the approach taken by some jihadist movements in Mali, Ansar ul Islam didn’t try to take control of part of the country. Rather,
it plunged the entire province into widespread violence by using rhetoric based on the fight against social inequality, injustices and poor
governance. Its rhetoric – which targets security forces and the state – resonated with people in these areas.
“We don’t need the state any more. It’s the state that has radicalised all these young people. They have been chased from their land, starved,
or killed. What’s happening now is the response to all these acts of violence committed by the state.”
The combination of poverty, a lack of public services, security forces’ inefficiency and neighboring countries’ instability has contributed to
the growing radicalization of civil populations in Burkina Faso.

OE Watch | March 2020

61

AFRICA
Burkina Faso: Sahelian Jihadists Conduct Massacre
OE Watch Commentary: On 25 January, militants attacked
the village of Silgadji in Burkina Faso, massacring several
dozen civilians. The excerpted French-language article details
the tactics used by the militants based on an interview with
one of the survivors. The survivor, who lost several family
members in the massacre, stated that several days before the
massacre, four militants warned villagers that men must wear
pants above the ankle and let their beards grow and women
must wear the veil. These demands reflected Sahelian jihadists’
interpretation of Islam.
The villagers did not follow these demands, and days later,
100 militants returned to attack the village market, the most
public location in the village where the jihadists’ demands were
supposed to be followed. The militants gathered the men and
Mosquee Ouagadougou [Ouagadougou Mosque].
women and separated them into two groups and let the women
Source: Sputniktilt via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mosquee_Ouagadougou.jpg, CC by 3.0
go, but then began shooting the men to death, including those
who tried to run away, and some women who also began running away. According to the article, the survivor recalled that Burkinabe security
forces had also previously visited the village and claimed that the militants may have targeted the villagers because they suspected villagers were
collaborating with the security forces.
The article also indicates that the security forces’ inability to arrive to defend the village on time was a surprise to the villagers. At a time when
villagers cannot depend on the security forces for protection and are facing massacres by jihadists, villagers in Burkina Faso will increasingly rely
on themselves for self-defense. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“In a previous visit, they had... ordered the men
to... let the beard grow. To women, they demanded
the wearing of the veil.”
Source: “Un rescapé du massacre de Silgadji témoigne (A Survivor of the Silgadji Massacre Testifies),” http://lefaso.net, 29 January 2020.
https://lefaso.net/spip.php?article94628
The village of Silgadji, in Soum province, was the victim of a terrorist attack on January 25, 2020. The location chosen by the attackers was
the village market. In the days before the attack, alerts given by the villagers who felt things were coming on the fateful day. The witness of
events, who lost several members of his family, between his mourning and anger, tells us about the painful events.
At around 3 p.m., in this village in the commune of Tongomayel, Soum province, Sahel region, four terrorists arrive perched on two
motorcycles. They got their supplies of water and food before leaving. A few moments later, the visitors return, this time to tell the villagers
that the instructions they had given were not followed. In a previous visit, they had indeed ordered the men to no longer wear pants that cover
the entire foot and they should wear short pants and let the beard grow. To women, they demanded the wearing of the veil. They had warned
that they would come back and those who did not comply would not have access to the market and would be retaliated against. According to a
resident of the village, who told us the horror scenes, after those four terrorists came, nearly 100 terrorists swept through Silgadji.
When they brought them there, the residents were divided into two groups and seated. Then the attackers freed the women. After a few
questions to the men, they told them openly that they will execute them because they did not obey their orders.

OE Watch | March 2020

62

AFRICA
Burkina Faso to Arm and Train Civilians to Counter
Terrorist Groups
OE Watch Commentary: Burkina Faso is the latest West African
country to face serious security threats from terrorist groups.
According to the excerpted French-language article from RFI, a French
news and current affairs outlet, Burkina Faso is so overwhelmed by
terrorist groups that its military is calling on civilians to volunteer to
support its efforts. The article notes the latest incident that sparked
the adoption of this new policy was a 20 January terrorist attack that
killed 36 Burkinabe civilians.

Burkina Faso-Pos.

Source: German Wikipedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Burkina_Faso-Pos.png CC by 3.0

The civilian volunteers will receive 14 days of military training
on basic tactics, such as managing observation posts, conducting
ambushes, and rules of discipline, including respecting human rights.
The article indicates the purpose of the training is to enable the
civilian vigilantes to be able to defend their own communities until
the security forces can arrive and support them. The article points
out the risk that the trainees could themselves become security risks,
including joining the terrorist groups. Therefore, participants in the
trainings will be required to undergo what Burkina Faso calls a “moral
investigation” to determine their suitability for the trainings. Senior
military officials also express concerns about possible unintended
consequences of the training initiative, such as jihadists increasingly
targeting civilians now that they are being armed to combat them.

In the past, civilian self-defense militias called “koglweogo” were
implicated in rights abuses and racketeering, among other crimes, in Burkina Faso. Given this past record, there is concern that this may re-occur
despite the vetting of participants. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The idea of involving the citizens in this national
cause is a good thing, but it is the modalities and the
implementation that worry us.”
Source: “L’armée burkinabè va former des civils volontaires pour défendre le pays (The Burkinabe army to train civilian volunteers to defend
the country),” RFI, 22 January 2020. http://www.rfi.fr/fr/afrique/20200122-arm%C3%A9e-burkinab%C3%A8-va-former-civils-volontairesd%C3%A9fendre-pays?ref=tw_i
It sounds like forming self-defense groups, but officially they will be volunteers for the defense of the homeland. These volunteers will receive
initial military training for fourteen days. They will be trained by specialists on armament, basic tactics, including ambushes, on managing an
observation post, civic and moral education, rules of discipline, and the principles of using weapons and respecting human rights. Their task
will be to provide information and defend territory at the level of their place of residence in the event of an attack, while of course waiting for
the defense and security forces to deploy there.
To prevent volunteering from contributing to terrorist networks, recruitment will be followed by a moral investigation and will be supervised
by the military. And these volunteers will be responsible before the courts for reprehensible acts committed during their missions, according
to these texts. “The idea of involving the citizens in this national cause is a good thing, but it is the modalities and the implementation
that worry us,” one civil society member explained. “Does introducing a form of confusion between civilians and the military not risk
exacerbating the violence of the jihadists against civilians?” asked a security expert.

OE Watch | March 2020

63

AFRICA
Al-Qaeda Loyalists Defect to ISIS in the Sahel
OE Watch Commentary: In the Sahel region, al-Qaeda and the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) have affiliate groups. Al-Qaeda’s affiliate is
called Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal Muslimin (JNIM) and ISIS’s affiliate
is called Islamic State in Greater Sahara (ISGS). Although JNIM was
previously stronger than ISGS, now ISGS is thought to be stronger than
JNIM. The excerpted French-language article from the African think-tank
Timbuktu Institute claims that ISGS will continue to strengthen and JNIM
will weaken.

[Jemal Oumar] Traders at the market in Bassiknou tell Magharebia that they
encounter al-Qaeda preaching while trading in Mali.

The article claims that fighters are planning to defect from JNIM subleader
Amadou Kufa to ISGS because Kufa has an alienating leadership style and
is considered to be too subservient to JNIM’s overall leader, Iyad ag Ghaly.
Whereas Kufa’s fighters are mostly Fulani, Iyad ag Ghaly is a Tuareg. At the
same time, the article notes that ISGS has recently launched several major
attacks and released high quality propaganda videos with attack footage.
These videos are apparently convincing Kufa’s fighters that ISGS is on the
upsurge.

As a result of the competition between JNIM and ISGS, the article reports
that clashes have begun occurring between Kufa and his deputy, who is planning to defect from Kufa to ISGS. Kufa previously needed this
deputy to strengthen JNIM’s presence in central Mali because the deputy is from that region. However, the deputy believed Kufa mismanaged
relationships with local communities over pastoral land.
Source: Magharebia via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bassikounou-2011.jpg, CC BY 2.0

The article is a reminder that jihadist groups in the Sahel are not only battling regional militaries but also engaging in fratricidal conflicts. The
regional militaries, however, are unlikely to benefit significantly from JNIM’s own infighting or intra-jihadist conflicts, because defectors from
Kufa will join ISGS and divert personnel and resources to ISGS. This will result in ISGS’s becoming an even greater adversary for regional
militaries. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“An important fact today complicating the map of
jihadism in the Sahel and the whole region will be
intense rivalry between terrorist groups despite the
impressions of convergence and coordination.”
Source: “Remous au Macina: ‘Des lieutenants d’Amadoun Khouffa sur le point de rejoindre l’Etat islamique au Grand Sahara’ (Twist in
Macina: ‘Lieutenants of Amadou Kufa about to Join Islamic State in the Greater Sahara’),” Timbuktu-institute.org, 20 January 2020. https://
timbuktu-institute.org/index.php/toutes-l-actualites/item/305-remous-au-macina-des-lieutenants-d-amadoun-khouffa-sur-le-point-derejoindre-l-etat-islamique-au-grand-sahara-timbuktu-institute
The rivalries between Al-Qaida and the Islamic State will take a new turn in the coming days and will restructure the balance of power in
Mali and more particularly in central Mali. Indeed, elements of the Macina Liberation Front are increasingly accusing Amadou Kufa of a
certain propensity to “alienate” others and be the “servant” of Iyad Ag Ghali. Unexpected circumstances are pushing [his followers] into the
arms of Aboul Walid Al-Sahraoui, the head of Islamic State in Greater Sahara (ISGS), who led the attacks in Inatés, Niger and whose video
was widely disseminated. But, an important fact today complicating the map of jihadism in the Sahel and the whole region will be intense
rivalry between terrorist groups despite the impressions of convergence and coordination.
Control of Mali and the “three-border area” represents a crucial issue for the different groups. Sources in the Macina area in central
Mali report to Timbuktu Institute that violent clashes took place on January 10 in Liptako between elements of Amadou Kufa involving a
certain Mamadou Mobbo. It should be remembered that Mamadou Mobbo was one of those who helped legitimize Amadou Kufa’s fight in the
beginning in Macina, where he did not actually come from. Kufa, who is instead from Tenenkou in Gourma, needed Mamadou Mobbo to gain
acceptance in central Mali.

OE Watch | March 2020

64

AFRICA
Boko Haram Threatens to Cut Borno State from Nigeria
OE Watch Commentary: The excerpted article from a
Nigerian source discusses how Boko Haram’s current strategy
risks cutting off northeastern Nigeria’s Borno State from the rest
of the country. For several weeks in January, the group attacked
the crucial Kano-Maiduguri highway connecting northern
Nigeria’s largest city, Kano, with Borno’s capital, Maiduguri.
The article points out that this is similar to the group’s strategy
during the height of its territorial conquests in 2013-2014 in
Borno, when it sought to render that highway and other roads
inaccessible by bombing major bridges and occupying roadside
villages.
In terms of tactics, the article observes that Boko Haram
often dresses in military attire, which makes drivers mistakenly
believe the militants are the army. This enables the group to set
Civilian Joint Force members patrol in Maiduguri.
up fake checkpoints and capture or kill passengers and disrupt Source: C. Oduah (VOA) via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Civilian_Joint_Force_members_patrol_in_Maiduguri.jpg, Public Domain
traffic. In particular, the article states that Boko Haram has recently begun to target aid workers and Christians on the highways and released their
execution videos through media channels affiliated with the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).
In a worst case scenario, the article argues that the Kano-Maiduguri highway would have to be closed down, which would severely affect trade
in northern Nigeria. This is why, apparently, Borno governor Babagana Zulum has urged the military to take all measures to secure that highway.
This means that passengers are increasingly forced to travel with military convoys, including passengers who are especially targeted by Boko
Haram, such as Christian pilgrims. The article ends on a pessimistic note by reminding that Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari had promised
to end the insurgency when he came into office in 2015- a promise that remains unkept. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“It seems that if the government fails to
address the problem, the road may soon be
in the hands of the insurgents.”
Source: “Increasing Boko Haram Attacks on Highways Threaten to Cut Borno Off from Nigeria,” premiumtimesng.com, 23 January 2020.
https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/373896-special-report-increasing-boko-haram-attacks-on-highways-threaten-to-cut-bornooff-from-nigeria.html
Fear is now mounting that Borno State may soon be totally cut off from the rest of Nigeria as Boko Haram insurgents in the past few weeks
have launched daily attacks on the Kano-Maiduguri highway, the only remaining safe route to the state.
Today, to travel from Maiduguri to Biu, about 180 kilometres in the southern part of the state, commuters now go through Yobe, Bauchi
and Gombe states, covering a distance of about 560km. It is even worse for communities in northern Borno. In December 2018, the military
reopened most of the roads after “reclaiming” them from Boko Haram. But it still required heavily armed soldiers to escort long convoys
of vehicles to ply the routes. Despite that, travellers and their military escorts suffered a series of fatal ambushes by Boko Haram gunmen.
Today, the “reopened roads” have been abandoned as it has become suicidal to ply them.
Though the Theatre Commander said the highway is safe for motorists, it was the first time in a long time that pilgrims were given military
escort from Damaturu to Maiduguri. Governor Zulum two weeks ago begged the Federal government to ensure that the military does not
shut down the Maiduguri-Kano highway. But it seems that if the government fails to address the problem, the road may soon be in the hands
of the insurgents. President Buhari had in May 2015 promised to end Boko Haram and improve the security situation in the Northeast. It is
now clear from the current state of insecurity that the promise is far from fulfilled.

OE Watch | March 2020

65

AFRICA
Mali Army Returns to Kidal after Six Year Absence
OE Watch Commentary: Malian armed forces recently
returned to the northern city of Kidal six years after effectively
being driven out of the region. The announcement was one
of the highlights of the Algiers Peace Accord Follow-up
Committee held in Bamako in January 2020. According to
the committee, “the return of the reconstituted army to Kidal
will be a reality beginning January 24, 2020.” Although it
took another few weeks to fulfill the mandate, the units that
entered Kidal in mid-February, known as “reconstituted”
include former rebels integrated into the Malian army in
accordance with the 2015 Algiers peace agreement.
The return of the army to Kidal is intended as a prelude
to the deployment of other reconstituted units to Ménaka,
Gao and Timbuktu. There is a lot at stake. According to
Africa News, Kidal, 1,500 km northeast of Bamako, is the
Tuareg cultural stronghold and the historical cradle of the
most influential Tuareg clans. It is also a region that has been
marginalized since Malian independence in 1960, and where
the various Tuareg rebellions were born.

Malian soldiers stand in formation during the closing ceremony of Exercise Flintlock in Bamako,
Mali, November 20, 2008.
Source: Staff Sergeant Samuel Bendet, U.S. Africa Command via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Malian_Soldiers.jpg, Public domain

Since the federal government suffered a significant military defeat in May 2014, Kidal has been controlled by the Coordination of Movements
of Azawad (CMA), a Tuareg-dominated alliance of former rebel armed groups. The CMA is a signatory to the 2015 Algiers Agreement with an
alliance of pro-government armed groups, called the Platform.
The return of the reconstituted Malian army made up of the Malian Armed Forces (FAMA) and ex-combatants is a necessary positive step for
several reasons. First, according to local media outlets, Malian public opinion towards the government and the armed forces has become more and
more negative in recent months as the Malian army suffered a number of battlefield setbacks. The inability of the armed forces to beat insurgents,
secure territory and provide security to the population has been a major stumbling block in the government’s efforts to maintain credibility and
hence order. The move back into Kidal could reverse that negative trend as it is in effect regaining lost territory and restoring national sovereignty
over part of the country that until recently had no real federal presence.
Second, the move to put the Malian army back in Kidal might be a small positive step for a renewed trust in foreign military and political efforts,
i.e., the UN mission and the French Operation Barkhane. Many Malians also believe that the French forces were specifically keeping the Malian
army out of Kidal the last six years to establish a partnership with the Toureg and other elements governing Kidal to secure the country’s natural
resources for France’s benefit.
Finally, the article concluded that the return of a federal presence to Kidal could help regional stability and relations between Mali and its
neighbors. The issue has been causing tension as Mali’s neighbors have claimed that Kidal served as a rear base for jihadist attacks into
neighboring countries. End OE Watch Commentary (Billingsley)

“The return of the national army to Kidal...
is... a strong affirmation of a restoration of
authority of the Malian state...”

OE Watch | March 2020

66

AFRICA
Continued: Mali Army Returns to Kidal after Six Year
Absence
Source: “L’armée malienne est de retour dans la ville symbole de Kidal (The Malian army is back in the symbolic city of Kidal),”
AfricaNews, 13 February 2020. https://fr.africanews.com/2020/02/13/mali-l-armee-vient-d-arriver-dans-la-ville-symbole-de-kidalcommandement/
The Malian army returned on Thursday to Kidal (north), a symbolic city from which it had been absent for years and where its return is
supposed to demonstrate the restoration of state sovereignty over the territory...
In a context of serious security deterioration in Mali and the Sahel, the return of the national army to Kidal, today under the control of exTuareg rebels, is anticipated as a strong affirmation of a restoration of authority of the Malian state, which is no longer exercised over large
areas of the country.
It is also supposed to give the appearance of reconciliation in the country at war since 2012. The units that entered Kidal, known as
“reconstituted”, include former rebels integrated into the Malian army in accordance with the peace agreement of Algiers of 2015.
The return of the Malian army to Kidal must be a prelude to the deployment of other “reconstituted” units in Ménaka, Gao and Timbuktu.
The implementation of the Algiers agreement, with its provisions for the integration of ex-combatants, as well as the recovery of the
authority of the State are considered as political components essential for an end to the crisis, in more than the purely military action carried
out by the Malian, French, African and UN forces.
Mali has been confronted since 2012 with separatist, Salafist and jihadist insurgencies and inter-community violence which has left
thousands of people dead and hundreds of thousands displaced. Departing from the north of the country, the violence spread to the center
and to neighboring countries, Burkina Faso and Niger.
Kidal, 1,500 km northeast of Bamako, is the Tuareg cultural stronghold and the historical cradle of the most influential clans. It is also a
region that has been marginalized since Malian independence and where the various Tuareg rebellions were born.
The Malian army had not recovered since May 2014. A visit by the Prime Minister at the time, Moussa Mara, had given rise to fighting which
had resulted in his heavy defeat against the rebels.
Kidal has since been controlled by the Coordination of Movements of Azawad ( CMA ), a Tuareg-dominated alliance of former rebel armed
groups. The CMA is a signatory to the 2015 Algiers agreement with an alliance of pro-government armed groups, called the Platform.
The conditions for the deployment of “reconstituted” Malian forces in Kidal were the subject of months of negotiations between the CMA ,
the Malian state and its foreign partners.
Yvan Guichaoua, researcher at the University of Kent, underlines the importance of the return to Kidal.
“There are many symbolic obstacles that must be removed to create the minimum cohesion required to form a viable counterterrorism front,
and the return of forces to Kidal provided for in the peace agreement was one of those obstacles,” he said.
The situation in Kidal is also a source of strong tension for Mali’s neighbors who suspect or denounce alliances between separatists and
jihadists. For them, Kidal served as a rear base for jihadist attacks.
Kidal also gives rise to accusations against... France, because of its presumed links with the Tuareg rebels... These accusations appear in
speeches hostile to the French presence, [which have] become louder in recent months.

OE Watch | March 2020

67

LATIN AMERICA
Russian Foreign Minister Comments on the US in Latin
America
OE Watch Commentary: In late December, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
granted an interview to Venezuelan news source Telesur, where he discussed his views on
US policy and actions in Latin America. The noteworthy parts of the interview are excerpted
here.
Lavros claims that the “United States has tried to shape Latin America as it sees fit, but
the region is more complex than originally anticipated by American simpletons.” He notes
that the internal political processes of various Latin American countries are related to each
country’s specific needs and dynamics and argues that the “US attempted to influence
internal political processes in Latin America in order to support their geopolitical interests.”
He states that a key strategy that the US used in Latin America was “to change so-called
undesirable regimes and redirect any doubts down correct “channels.” He also asserts that
the US has “attempted to divide regional integration processes and impose rigid neo-liberal
leaders to control political processes that occurred during 2019 in Chile, Ecuador, Colombia
and Bolivia.” Lavrov also maintains that the US has not been successful in achieving its
goals in Latin America. He closes his interview by claiming the US has accused Russia for
Latin America’s failures, and promises Russian support to help keep Latin America and the
Caribbean strong. End OE Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Sergei Lavrov, 2016.

Source: US Department of State via Wikimedia,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sergey_Lavrov_February_2016.jpg, Public Domain

“The US attempted to influence internal
political processes in Latin America in order
to support their geopolitical interests.”
-Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
Source: “Lavrov: América Latina es más compleja de lo que calculó EE.UU. (Lavrov: Latin America is More Complex than the US
Estimated,” Telesur, 26 December 2019. https://www.telesurtv.net/noticia/-20191226-0010.html
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov’s comments regarding US interests in Latin America are translated below as follows:
“The United States has tried to shape Latin America as it sees fit, but the region is more complex than originally anticipated by American
simpletons.”
“A key US strategy in Latin America was to change so-called undesirable regimes and redirect any doubts down correct “channels”.
“The US has attempted to divide regional integration processes and impose rigid neo-liberal leaders to control political process that
occurred during 2019 in Chile, Ecuador, Colombia and Bolivia.”
“Internal political processes are developed in various Latin American countries and are directly related to the countries’ specific needs and
dynamics.”
“The US attempted to influence internal political processes in Latin America in order to support their geopolitical interests.”
Lavrov says that despite the hard strangulation with economic sanctions and “color revolutions” methods, it has not been possible for the
US. implement a “lightning war” in relation to Venezuela, Cuba, Nicaragua.
He also referred to the fact that the Government of the United States has held “external forces” (in reference to Russia) responsible for its
failure in politics around Latin America.
The diplomat said that for Russia, the Latin American and Caribbean region is an important element of the emerging multipolar world order
and that the role of his country is to contribute to these nations being strong, politically united and economically sustainable.
OE Watch | March 2020

68

LATIN AMERICA
Russia-Cuba Relations Continue Revival
OE Watch Commentary: On 5 February, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov
kicked off a three-day visit to Cuba, Mexico and Venezuela to meet with his counterparts.
During Lavrov’s visit to Cuba, Venezuelan news source Telesur printed a tweet by Cuban
Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez as well as Lavrov’s comments on Russia-Cuba relations,
demonstrating the strong relationship. Rodriquez tweeted, “We ratified our wonderful
relationship and ongoing commitment to continue expanding cooperation to tackle problems.”
Meanwhile, Lavrov noted that Russia is “categorically opposed to US sanctions and stand[s]
by our Cuban friends during this time. We further insist on eliminating financial/economic
barriers imposed by the US in order to guarantee complete socio-economic development,
provide sovereign equality and ensure that equal rights are granted to all Cubans.”
The second accompanying passage from The Spectator points out that Russian support
to Cuba is nothing new and most recently goes back to 2013 when the two countries began
increasing trade and investment activities. The passage also notes that Moscow is stepping
up its military support for Havana. It points out for example, that Russia issued a ~$43
million loan to Cuba in February 2019 so that the island could maintain its Soviet-era military
equipment. It also highlights that in June of 2019, “the Russian navy also sent one of its most
advanced warships to Cuba in a gesture of solidarity amidst Havana’s growing tensions with
Washington.” (Also see: “Increased Russian Soft Power in Cuba,” OE Watch, January 2020
and “More Russia in Cuba,” OE Watch, November 2019) End OE Watch Commentary
(Fiegel)

Embassy of Russia in Havana.

Source: Manuel Castro via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Embassy_of_Russia_
in_Havana,_Cuba.jpg, CA by 2.0

“We (Russia) are categorically opposed to US sanctions and

stand by our Cuban friends during this time. We further insist on
eliminating financial/economics barriers imposed by the US to
guarantee complete socio-economic development, sovereign equality
and ensure that equal rights are granted to all Cubans.”
Source: “Canciller de Rusia llega a Cuba en visita oficial (Russian Chancery Arrives to Cuba on Official Visit),” Telesur, 6 February 2020.
https://www.telesurtv.net/news/cuba-rusia-lavrov-llega-gira-america-latina-20200206-0001.html
Bruno Rodriguez Tweets Regarding his visit with Sergei Lavrov
--“We ratified our wonderful relationship and ongoing commitment to continue expanding cooperation to tackle problems.”-Lavrov to Telesur Regarding Russian Take on US Sanctions Imposed on Cuba
--“they (the US) are showing marked interest in disrupting economic activity on the island which is actually a human rights violation in the
sense it hurts the common interests of the people.”
“We (Russia) are categorically opposed to US sanctions and stand by our Cuban friends during this time. We further insist on eliminating
financial/economic barriers imposed by the US in order to guarantee complete socio-economic development, provide sovereign equality and
ensure that equal rights are granted to all Cubans.”
Source: “Simes, Dimitri. “Putin is Resurrecting Russia’s Cold War Pact with Cuba,” The Spectator, 6 February 2020.
https://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2020/02/putin-is-resurrecting-russias-cold-war-pact-with-cuba/
With Cuba feeling the burden of US sanctions, Russia has emerged as an alternative source of trade and investment. Trade between the two
countries more than doubled between 2013 and 2019, jumping from £139 million to over £380 million.
Additionally, Moscow is also stepping up its military support for Havana. For example, Russia issued a £33 million loan to Cuba in February
2019 so that the island could maintain its Soviet-era military equipment. In June of 2019, the Russian navy also sent one of its most advanced
warships to Cuba in a gesture of solidarity amidst Havana’s growing tensions with Washington.
OE Watch | March 2020

69

LATIN AMERICA
Juan Guaidó and Cubazuela
OE Watch Commentary: Juan Guaidó, who is officially recognized as the President of
Venezuela (or at least as interim president) by a number of countries including the United States,
arrived back in Venezuela on 11 February. He had been on a foreign trip that included Canada
and the United States, where he was a spotlighted guest at the State of the Union Address on 4
February. Upon his arrival at the international airport in Maiquetía, Guaidó was met by a throng
of supporters as well as Bolivarian protesters. The accompanying passages from local sources
shed light on how Guaidó is viewed by the Maduro regime and the opposition.
As the first accompanying reference reports, the Bolivarians (affiliates of the regime of Nicolás
Maduro and the de facto rulers) proceeded to physically attack members of Guaidó’s entourage.
In the four-hour-long video report, the more dramatic violence begins a little after the three-hour
mark, with much of the video showing interviews with people waiting at the airport before the
arrival. Perhaps significant about the event is that the Maduro regime allows Guaidó to return
and remain at large, and also that while no one in the opposition will get away with beating any
Bolivarian celebrity or functionary, Bolivarians who beat up opposition deputies and Guaidó
supporters are unlikely to be punished. In other words, while the regime might see disposing of
Guaidó to be an unnecessary risk, neither Guaidó himself nor his people or movement present
much of a real threat to the regime. In fact, the Guaidó opposition seems to be treated as a prop
to be ridiculed and humiliated, at the regime’s pleasure.
This may go some way to explain the content of the second accompanying reference, which is
a screenshot taken on 11 February from DolarToday, a popular opposition website. DolarToday
has long been running a “what if elections were held today” survey. Maria Corina Machado,
María Corina Machado at a gathering in Guarenas in 2014. who supports Guaidó as the interim president but takes a harder line than he does, comes out
Source: Carlos Díaz via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Maria_Corina_
Machado.jpg, CC BY 2.0
ahead with 55% of the vote. Not scientific, the survey still tells us something. Machado regularly
underlines that if the Venezuelan people are ever to rid themselves of the current regime, physical coercion will have to be part of the formula. If
the survey is reflective of popular attitudes within the overall opposition population, it suggests that while the opposition publicly gets behind Mr.
Guaidó as the interim president, a majority of that opposition favors a more assertive understanding of what opposition should mean.
Some of the reason for dissatisfaction with Guaidó may be found in the third accompanying reference. In it, essayist Emmanuel Rincón scolds
Guaidó for having suggested that Cuba help resolve the problem in Venezuela. As Rincón sees it, Cuba is the main problem. End OE Watch
Commentary (Demarest)

“Security personnel tried to stop the legislators [supporters
of Guaidó] from getting there, and persons attached to the
regime of Nicolás Maduro... came there to intimidate and
assault the legislators as well as members of the media…”
Source: Producers, “Juan Guaidó Salió de Maiquetía rumbo a Caracas (Juan Guaidó Left Maiquetía in route to Caracas),” 800 Noticias, 11
February 2020. https://800noticias.com/en-vivo-juan-guaido-arriba-al-aeropuerto-de-maiquetia
“…Venezuelan leader Juan Guaidó just arrived at the Simón Bolivar International Airport in Maiquetía at 5:03 this Tuesday after completing
international rounds…
After entering the lobby of the airport, Guaidó was able to take his vehicle and go up toward Caracas…
Security personnel tried to stop the legislators [supporters of Guaidó] from getting there, and persons attached to the regime of Nicolás
Maduro, along with presumed workers of the sanctioned airline Conviasa, came there to intimidate and assault the legislators as well as
members of the media…”

OE Watch | March 2020

70

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Juan Guaidó and Cubazuela
Source: Editors, “Si las elecciones presidenciales fueran hoy ¿A quien elegirías como presidente? (If the presidential elections were held
today, who would you elect as president?),” DolarToday, 11 February 2020, https://dolartoday.com/video-guaido-llego-venezuela-entreenfrentamientos-y-bloqueos-en-maiquetia-11feb/

Source: Emmanuel Rincón, “No Guaidó, Cuba no es parte de la solución, es el principal problema (No, Guaidó, Cuba is not part of the
solution, it is the main problem),” Panam Post, 28 January 2020, https://es.panampost.com/emmanuel-rincon/2020/01/28/guaido-cubasolucion/
“…For those foreigners that read me and do not understand the division in the Venezuelan opposition, it is basically this – the ‘official
opposition’, that which is in the Assembly, in spite of passing 21 years being crushed by Chavism, continues to consider Chavism as a political
force and not as a criminal force…
Nevertheless, Guaidó went back to doing it his way [after having asserted that the regime was a criminal conglomerate and that Cuba was its
mentor], declaring publicly that he hopes Cuba, the country that has subjected, robbed and extorted us for more than two decades, form part
of the solution…
That a great part of the country calls them [the Guaidó crowd] collaborators is not gratuitous…”

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | March 2020

71

LATIN AMERICA
ELN Gaining Strength in Colombia and Venezuela
OE Watch Commentary: More regional reportage is appearing that indicates the power of the Colombian group National Liberation Army
(ELN) continues to rise. The accompanying reference is an article from Colombian leading legacy newspaper El Tiempo, reporting the results of a
study, which found that the ELN is present in half the states in neighboring Venezuela, and controls vital economic resources. The article enjoyed
immediate resonance, was broadly chosen for comment, linkage and republication in regional outlets. It is hardly the first article to list evidence
of increased ELN strength. It goes a little further, however, floating the ELN’s comfortable presence in Venezuela as an argument for why it is
not possible to defeat the ELN militarily. The editorial, extending from assertions in the study, implies that negotiations between the Colombian
government and the ELN guerrilla group should not be totally discarded and/or that diplomatic communications with the regime of Nicolás
Maduro in Caracas should be reinitiated in some form or another. The researchers of the study cited ELN’s growing ability to hurt Colombia,
including kidnappings and displacements, as the reason for their prescription of diplomacy. A jaw-dropping line from the article suggests that if
the Colombian government goes down the road of trying to militarily defeat the ELN, it might “lead to a low intensity war with high costs.” One
cannot help but wonder what the researchers would call whatever it is that has been going on in Colombia for the past several decades. (Also see:
“ELN Rising,” OE Watch, June 2019). End OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“The scenario of a military defeat of the
ELN is improbable and could lead to a low
intensity war...”
Source: Editors, “El Eln tiene influencia en siete de los diez municipios con más coca (The ELN has influence in the ten counties with the
most coca),” El Tiempo, 30 January 2020. https://www.eltiempo.com/justicia/conflicto-y-narcotrafico/radiografia-del-eln-y-su-presencia-enzonas-de-narcotrafico-456930; and Elías Rivas, “ELN tiene influencia en 12 de los 24 estados venezolanos: El Tiempo (ELN has influence in
12 of 24 Venezuelan states: El Tiempo),” Noticierodigital, 30 January 2020. https://www.noticierodigital.com/2020/01/eln-tiene-influencia-en12-de-los-24-estados-venezolanos-el-tiempo/
“Ideas for Peace Foundation (Fundación Ideas para la Paz, FIP) claims in an in-depth study that shows the [strength of] ELN today and why
getting rid of this group by way of arms does not appear viable. ‘The scenario of a military defeat of the ELN is improbable and could lead to
a low intensity war with high costs in humanitarian and environmental terms.’…
…Why does the FIP assert that it is not possible to defeat the ELN militarily?
The fact that they have Venezuela not only as a strategic rearguard, but also as a destabilizing alliance changes the panorama in a radical
manner. Thus, to do things like in the past as they were done against the heads of the FARC in Colombia is very difficult.” ...
According to the International Crisis Group and Insight Crime data, this guerrilla has influence in 12 of the 24 Venezuelan states where
it would be smuggling gasoline, mining and extortion. In addition, affirms the Venezuelan organization FundaRedes, the ELN carries out
indoctrination and recruitment activities in schools and controls stations endorsed by the government of Nicolás Maduro in at least six
states....
In addition to extortion, the humanitarian effects of the ELN have been increasing. Thus, while in 2015 there were two events of confinement
and 11 displacements involving that guerrilla, in 2018 those cases increased to 8 and 51, respectively....
Control in border areas is also seen on the Colombian side. Since 2017, in Vichada there is information about the control of mines exercised
by the ELN and the appropriation of minerals that enter the country. Even before the kidnappings on the Colombian side, relatives of victims
say they have had to move to the other side of the border to negotiate with the guerrillas for their release.
As the control of the ELN on the other side of the border grows stronger, violence has intensified. That is why, says the FIP, the effects of
a military offensive against the ELN or the possibility of reactivating a negotiation will depend greatly on what happens in the future with
Maduro.

OE Watch | March 2020

72

LATIN AMERICA
ELN and FARC Involvement in Colombia’s Protest
Marches
OE Watch Commentary: Protest marches have long been a feature of political expression in Colombia. There have been a lot of marches in
the last year or so, however, some less peaceful than others. The accompanying passages provide local perspectives and discuss claims that “the
FARC and the ELN have been manipulating the marches using paid infiltrators.”
The first accompanying reference, from a well-known conservative political leader, expresses an opinion of frustration regarding this particular
form of struggle and its costs, pointing to the violence of the 2019 marches. Beyond the ideological coloring of the marches, their organization,
timing, geographical positioning, and logistical sustainment have been all but perfected. He writes, “...the vandals are infiltrated, organized to
generate violence and... there is someone behind them.”
The second through fifth references are from Pulzo, a new, right-leaning news outlet, which has focused coverage on the marches. Pulzo notes
in the second reference that the marches have had a great deal of organizational participation from the dissident FARC groups. That reportage
cites a set of audio recordings of an intercepted conversation between FARC organizers released by the Attorney General’s office and played by
Caracol Radio. Evidently, they are discussing how to manipulate the marches to cause chaos and get the government to negotiate with them in the
process. The third reference reports that the leftist mayor of Bogotá, Claudia López, saw the evidence and is convinced that it is irrefutable, that
the FARC and the ELN have been manipulating the marches using paid infiltrators. The passage quotes the Mayor as saying that “that they are
paid infiltrators for illegal armed groups.”
The fourth referenced article covers a number of methods of student recruitment uncovered by the investigations, as outlined by the mayor. One
of those methods has gained special public interest in Colombia, for obvious reasons. A Marxist Don Juan, aka ‘Simón, aka El Polvo Disidente,
had great success seducing co-eds and recruiting into radical organizations.
The fifth reference gives us a specific assertion regarding the operational goals of radical leaders for the marches. They had been attempting
to block the international airport, gaining international notoriety, placing a cost on travel and commerce, thus creating a mechanism for strategic
extortion. So far, they have not been successful.
The sixth accompanying reference, from the Panam Post has reportage of plans for the next round of marches, “convoked for February 2021” that are being orchestrated by the educators union. In spite of greater knowledge regarding operational details, it does not appear that the
Colombian government is much closer to solving the challenge from radical manipulation of student protest marches as a form of struggle. End
OE Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“According to the mayor, FARC dissidents paid
vandals who infiltrated the Bogota marches.”
Source: José Félix Lafaurie Rivera, “¡No más marchas! (No more marches),” Contexto Ganadero, 24 January 2020. https://www.
contextoganadero.com/columna/no-mas-marchas
“It is disconcerting to read what the Mayor of Bogotá says about the marches…
Of course, she had to recognize that the vandals are infiltrated, organized to generate violence and, most seriously, that there is someone
behind them. Where do they come from? She asks. Could it be that the mayor does not know?
Her reiterated accusations against her antecessor in the National Government [NFI] is outrageous: That last year there was stigmatization
of the marches, militarization of the City, curfews, and a death, while the recent marches, with four exceptions, were peaceful and ‘creative’.
We have seen the ruins from those exceptions and it does not make the Mayor look good ignoring the violence of the 2019 marches and [for
her] to question the decisions taken…
I marched in 2008 against the FARC, the most massively attended demonstration in our history, and I would again, but in one that repeats,
with a wounded pitch of street protest: No-more-marches/no-more-marches/ no-more-marches…”

OE Watch | March 2020

73

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: ELN and FARC Involvement in Colombia’s
Protest Marches
Source: Editors, “Las Farc-disidencias están metidas en las ‘marchas de protesta’ (FARC-dissidents are involved in the ‘protest marches’),”
Pulzo, 30 January 2020. https://www.pulzo.com/nacion/fiscalia-revela-audios-capturados-marchas-bogota-PP837847
“The audio recordings were made known by Caracol Radio this Thursday, and in one of them a man is heard informing another, who he
refers to as his ‘little boss’, that they are calling him to give him bad news about the ‘ food’…
Nevertheless, the radio station [Caracol Radio] says that the authorities interpret this conversation as code for the traffic and fabrication of
explosives used to organize disturbances in the marches, since none of these detainees has experience or knowledge regarding bakeries or the
cultivation of trees…
Within the documents, El Tiempo [daily newspaper] details that the revealed objective is to obtain ‘agreements with the government by way
of the mobilizations [marches], assemblies and hordes [crowds]’, in addition to generate chaos in the cities…”
Source: “Disidencias de Farc pagaron a vándalos que infiltraron marchas en Bogotá, según alcaldesa (According to the mayor, FARC
dissidents paid vandals who infiltrated the Bogota marches),” Pulzo, 5 February 2020. https://www.pulzo.com/nacion/disidencias-farcpagaron-vandalos-que-infiltraron-marchas-bogota-PP840588
“The chief executive [Mayor of Bogotá] made known that this finding [regarding ELN and FARC participation in the marches] came out of a
robust investigation process in which the authorities made ‘an irrefutable collection of evidence during several months’…
The Mayor stated that, ‘We are not talking about people who became agitated one day and went out to vandalize, but that they are paid
infiltrators for illegal armed groups’…”
Source: Editors, “Criminal casado y con hijos enamoró a universitarias para reclutarlas e infiltrar marchas (Criminal married with children
seduced co-eds to recruit them and infiltrate marches),” Pulzo, 5 February 2020. https://www.pulzo.com/nacion/como-disidencias-farc-elnreclutaron-jovenes-para-infiltrar-marchas-PP840800
“…That is only one of the strategies used by FARC dissidents to get youths to upset public order…
Blue Radio explained that it involves a man known by the alias ‘Simón’, who in spite of having a family, approached groups of university
students in order to achieve extramarital relations with students and convince them to join radical groups that are committing acts of violence
during the protests…”
Source: Editors, “Motivo por el que encapuchados quieren llevar marchas a El Dorado, según el Distrito (The reason why masked [protesters]
want to carry the marches to El Dorado [intl airport], according to the District),” Pulzo, 22 January 2020. https://www.pulzo.com/nacion/paraque-quieren-llegar-encapuchados-dorado-paro-nacional-PP833137
“…“The team of Claudia López [Mayor of Bogotá] asserted that the goal of the protestors is to block the El Dorado airport so that the
marches become ‘an international news item’…The Mayor explained that the demonstrators have already tried to get to El Dorado using the
student marches, ‘by way of confrontation’….”
Source: Andrés Fernández, “El anuncio de paro de Fecode coincide con fechas de Petro y ELN (The announcement of the FECODE strike
coincides with dates Petro and the ELN),” Panam Post, 10 February 2020. https://es.panampost.com/felipe-fernandez/2020/02/10/paro-defecode-eln/
“…“The team of Claudia López [Mayor of Bogotá] asserted that the goal of the protestors is to block the El Dorado airport so that the
marches become ‘an international news item’…The Mayor explained that the demonstrators have already tried to get to El Dorado using the
student marches, ‘by way of confrontation’….”

OE Watch | March 2020

74

LATIN AMERICA
Coca Spraying in Colombia
OE Watch Commentary: The use of aerial spraying of glyphosate
to eradicate coca cultivations is a perennial controversy in Colombia,
one that has recently returned to the forefront. The eradication method
is controversial because of its relative environmental, health and
socioeconomic impact. The accompanying references shed light on this
debate in Colombia.
The first accompanying reference is a recently published opinion from
a leading conservative who succinctly states arguments for augmenting
aerial spray of glyphosate against coca cultivations in the country. The
author addresses three major arguments – environmental, criminal and
economic. He notes that while strict controls have been made on the use
of glyphosate, the cultivation of coca itself does far more environmental
damage.

Aerial spraying.

Source: Jan Amiss from Pixabay , https://pixabay.com/photos/airplane-crop-duster-dangerous-465619/, Public Domain

The second reference is about six months old, published in the same
weekly newspaper, El Espectador, a legacy brand with a long history. The writer is a left-leaning opinion leader. He attacks the use of glyphosate,
arguing among other things that legalization of cocaine might be the preferable method of control.
The third reference is from the web page of an individual (John Marulanda, retired Colombian Army Colonel) whose opinions on security topics
in Colombia are widely referenced locally. His article puts the question into context. He argues that the issue of spraying and the issue of drug
trafficking writ large, cannot be separated from the generalized environment of illegality in Colombia. Looking at these references and others
like them to consider the pros and cons of aerial glyphosate spraying in Colombia, suggest that attempting to use this method in isolate would be
a frustratingly ineffective exercise as a reducer of coca production. In fact, even its use as an integrated element of a multi-part effort to reduce
production might still have only a partially mitigating effect on the chaos of impunities in Colombia. Maybe the saddest reminder from the attached
references is that the physical, natural environment of Colombia has been terribly hurt by cocaine production, while efforts to limit the use of
glyphosate (using environmental arguments) are eagerly supported by those actors who are doing the most harm. End OE Watch Commentary
(Demarest)

“This is a transport business, not a peasant economy…”
Source: Carlos Enrique Moreno, “La triple moral del glifosato (The triple standard of glyphosate),” El Espectador, 26 January 2020. https://
www.elespectador.com/opinion/la-triple-moral-del-glifosato-columna-901422
“…for each hectare of coca seeded, it was necessary to deforest 2.5 hectares of forest. The coca leaf that that hectare produces each year requires
for its processing around 2,260 liters of gasoline, 406 kilos of cement, 13 liters of sulfuric acid, two liters of hydrochloric acid, two kilos of potassium
permanganate, solvents, urea and other chemicals…
Of the approximately 12,000 homicides in Colombia in 2019, more than 50% were due to henchman activities related more than anything to drugtrafficking and illegal mining…
This is a transport business, not a peasant economy…”

Source: Salomón Kalmanovitz, “Otra vez el glifosato (Gliphosate again),” El Espectador, 1 July 2019, https://www.elespectador.com/opinion/
otra-vez-el-glifosato-columna-868594
“The Administration of Iván Duque announced plans to restart aerial spraying of herbicide…
An even more intelligent strategy, although utopic, would be to legalize use and control the traffic of cocaine…
But let’s not fool ourselves: the Administration run by the Democratic Center will look for confrontation in general and the war against drugs in
particular in order to polarize, get United States’ support and keep itself in power…”

Source: John Marulanda, “Viejo-nuevo terrorismo en Colombia (New-old terrorism in Colombia),” www.jmarulanda.com, 30 January 2020,
https://www.jmarulanda.com/site/viejo-nuevo-terrorismo-en-colombia/
“…With the highest production of cocaine in the world, uncontrolled borders, impunity, corruption and a Public Force under siege, it is patently
necessary to reevaluate the concept of terrorism in the country’s politics and its discourse on crime. And it urges the taking of decisions, as in Bolivia, to
suspend relations with Cuba, an island that adopts and protects the narco-terrorists that overwhelm us…”

OE Watch | March 2020

75

LATIN AMERICA
El Salvador’s Constitutional Crisis
OE Watch Commentary: The political health of El Salvador recently displayed
what look like symptoms of authoritarianism. On 9 February, President Nayib
Bukele (elected this past June) led an armed contingent of military and police into
the legislative chamber to force the passage of a financing loan for $109 million
worth of military and police equipment for his security plan. It did not go over
well. The first accompanying reference is from an article on 11 February, in
ElSalvador.com, reporting on Salvadoran’s Supreme Court’s order that Bukele
not do that again. The second reference, also from ElSalvador.com, is reportage
the same day of the negative response from the legislators, who apparently met in
an extraordinary plenary session the day after Bukele’s military stunt and issued
a “pronouncement to reject the militarization of the Legislative Branch that was
ordered by President Nayib Bukele..” The third reference, from legacy newspaper
La Prensa, is of President Bukele’s counter-response -- he was hardly contrite. The
session of the legislature that Bukele occupied had been called into emergency
session by the President using a tenuous interpretation of the Constitution. End OE
Watch Commentary (Demarest)

“[A]bstain from using the
Armed Force in activities
contrary to constitutionally
established purposes and putting
the republican, democratic
and representative form of
government at risk…”

Official photo of Nayib Bukele, 46th President of the Republic of El Salvador.
Source: Presidency of the Republic of El Salvador via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bukelepresident-offcial.png, CC BY 3.0

Source: L. Alas, E. Velásquez and O. Iraheta, “Sala le ordena a Bukele no utilizar a militares y policías para fines políticos (Court orders
Bukele to not use military and police for political ends),” ElSalvador.com, 11 February 2020. https://www.elsalvador.com/noticias/nacional/
sala-constitucional-crisis-asamblea-legislativa-nayib-bukele-demanda/685263/2020/
“[A]bstain from using the Armed Force in activities contrary to constitutionally established purposes and putting the republican, democratic and
representative form of government at risk…”

Source: Cecilia Fuentes, “Asamblea condena la toma militarizada de la institución y exige a Bukele desistir de amenazas (Assembly
condemns militarized take-over of the institution and insists Bukele stop making threats),” ElSalvador.com, 11 February 2020, https://www.
elsalvador.com/noticias/nacional/asamblea-legislativa-bukele-prestamo-diputados-crisis/685327/2020/
“The congressmen of the legislative Assembly carried out an extraordinary plenary session Monday afternoon with the objective of emitting a
pronouncement to reject the militarization of the Legislative Branch that was ordered by President Nayib Bukele on Sunday, 9 February. ‘Nothing will be
gained by force. It cannot be conceded (the loan of $109 million) with a pistol to the head….”

Source: Gabriel Campos Madrid, “Si fuera un dictador habría tomado el control de todo”, así ha respondido el presidente Bukele
(‘If I were a dictator, I would have taken control of everything’ is how President Bukele responded),” La Prensa, 11 February 2020.
https://www.laprensagrafica.com/elsalvador/Si-fuera-un-dictador-habria-tomado-el-control-de-todo-asi-ha-respondido-el-presidenteBukele-20200210-0093.html
“ ‘If I were a dictator or someone who did not respect democracy... I would have taken control of all of it. The Armed Forces and the Police are part of
that, too. The people got mad when I asked for calm, but if they had wanted, I would have taken control of the whole government that night’ he added.”

OE Watch | March 2020

76

LATIN AMERICA
Panama Lifts Weapons Moratorium
OE Watch Commentary: On 21 January, the President and Security
Minister of Panama issued a press release, excerpted here, announcing
the decision to let a 2011 law expire that limited the amount of firearms
importers could receive per shipment. The accompanying passages discuss
this development, in addition to providing insight as to why this change may
be significant.
In 2015, Panama passed legislation which made it legal for Panamanians to
own legally purchased weapons and for gun importers to import weapons into
the country. The move was hailed as a win by gun right activists worldwide,
given that the “right to bear arms” is not included in Panama’s constitution.
Panama is currently facing challenges on this issue however, in that
citizens can purchase legal weapons, but that stores simply don’t have them
on the shelves, due to the weapons-moratorium imposed in 2011. And even if
someone is able to obtain a weapon, it may take up to a year to license and
register.

9mm LUGER; 7,62 TOKAREV; .357 SIG; 10mm AUTO; .40 S&W; .45 GAP; .50 AE.

Source: Spectrums via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:9mm_7,62mm_357sig_10mm_45SW_45GAP_50AE_002.
jpg, Public Domain

Now with the moratorium lifted, El Diaro discusses how this represents a new chance for everyday citizens to own weapons. However it also
notes that “some fear that the legislation will just make it easier for criminals to obtain weapons.”
Panama has a long way to go in making weapons readily available to customers looking to buy them legally. The application process is still
backed up, and with the moratorium lift, importers will have more opportunities to purchase legally imported weapons. Still, demand for weapons
(both legal and illegal) in Panama make it likely that a black market for this item may persist for some time in the country, as discussed in the
excerpts from Insight Crime and Alerta Paisa. Black market necessity is associated with too many buyers in Panama and the fact that the country
serves as a hub for illegal weapon imports and is responsible for sending them to neighboring countries such Venezuela and Colombia. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

“Panama’s Association of Gunowners (APPA) views the moratorium

lift as positive in the sense that it will allow everyday citizens expanded
access to weapons. However, some fear that the legislation will just make
it easier for criminals to obtain weapons.”
Source: Press Release, Republic of Panama, 21 January 2020. https://www.minseg.gob.pa/2020/01/dejan-sin-efecto-la-veda-de-importacionde-armas/
Panamanian President Laurentino Cortizo and the Minister of Public Security Rolando Mirones did not extend the weapons moratorium in 2020. It is
now up to the Directorate of Institutional Public Security Affairs (Diasp) to respond to requisites to register weapons as long as they are complying with
requisites set in place and have the corresponding permits to do so.

Source: “El Gobierno de Panamá reabre la importación de armas (Panamanian Government Lifts Firearm Moratorium),” El Diorio.es, 22
January 2019. https://www.eldiario.es/politica/Gobierno-Panama-reabre-importacion-armas_0_987601241.html
Panama’s Association of Gunowners (APPA) views the moratorium lift as positive in the sense that it will allow everyday citizens expanded access to
weapons. However, some fear that the legislation will just make it easier for criminals to obtain weapons.

Source: “Lift on Panama Firearms Import Ban May Backfire Amid Homicide Spike,” Insight Crime, 31 January 2020. https://www.
insightcrime.org/news/brief/panama-firearms-import-ban/
Officials in Panama have ended a nearly decade-long ban on the importation of firearms, a move that could end up benefiting traffickers and corrupt
officials at a time when the Central American nation’s murder rate is on the rise.
Panama has in the past been identified as an important hub in the regional arms trade, according to a 2012 threat assessment from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Its geographic location makes it a natural destination for weapons originating in countries where gun laws are
lax. From Panama, the guns are then moved out of the country and often south into Colombia.

Source: “Mercado negro de armas de Panamá y Venezuela llega a Medellín (Black Market Weapons Arrive to Medellín from Panama and
Venezuela),” Alerta Paisa, 31 March 2019. https://www.alertapaisa.com/noticias/antioquia/mercado-negro-de-armas-de-panama-y-venezuelallega-medellin
Colombian Police Commander Eliécer Camacho Jiménez of Medellín reported that the city serves as a distribution point for illegal weapons that enter
the country from Panama and Venezuela.

OE Watch | March 2020

77

LATIN AMERICA
Social Networking Enables Kidnappers in Ciudad Juarez,
Mexico
OE Watch Commentary: Extortion is a commonly employed threat tactic
utilized by criminal groups in Mexico. According to Mexican news source
El Heraldo, kidnapping represented the most utilized extortion tactic until
the end of the Sinaloa and Juarez Cartel turf war in mid to late 2011. As
the passage notes, Ciudad Juarez was named the “kidnapping capitol of the
world” in 2009, but with the implementation of the city’s first-ever AntiExtortion Task Force, extortion related cases dropped by 90%.
However, kidnapping related extortion apparently remains prevalent
in the city as “family members and criminal posers began using social
media networks to include WhatsApp, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to
intimidate victims into believing that they were at risk for being kidnapped.”
Then, “victims ... provide ... information over multiple social networking sites
or phone apps.” Extortionists also use these applications to gain information
about the daily life of their victims. Although this source focuses on Ciudad
Juarez, it is likely that criminal throughout Mexico are utilizing social
networking applications to carry out extortion related kidnappings. End OE
Watch Commentary (Fiegel)

Map showing Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.

Source: Battroid via Wikimedia, https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mexico_Chihuahua_Juarez_location_map.svg, Public Domain

“Extortionists use applications such
as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and
WhatsApp, to gain information about the
daily life of their victims.”
Source: “Redes sociales, arma de extorsionadores (Social Networks, Hidden Weapon Used by Extortionists),” El Heraldo, 21 October 2019.
https://www.elheraldodejuarez.com.mx/policiaca/redes-sociales-arma-de-extorsionadores-4391865.html/amp
Ciudad Juarez experienced never-before violence from 2006 through 2011. In 2009, the city ranked highest for kidnappings and was deemed
the “kidnapping capitol of the world” in 2009. Following violence decreases in 2011, Mexican police worked to regain control in the border
city and quickly replaced its first-ever Anti-Kidnapping Task Force with the city’s first-ever Anti-Extortion Task Force.
Since its’ inception, extortion related cases dropped by 90%, but kidnapping related extortion remained prevalent in the city as family
members and criminal posers began using social media networks to include WhatsApp, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to intimidate victims
into believing that they were at risk for being kidnapped. How? Kidnappers contact victims or family members of potential victims and make
them believe they are at risk for being kidnapped. Ironically, it is the victims themselves that unwittingly provide enough information over
multiple social networking sites or phone apps to make them believe the scheme is real in the first place.
Extortionists, use applications such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and WhatsApp, to know the daily life of their victims.

OE Watch | March 2020

78

