https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/

Foreign Military Studies Office

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives of the Operational Environment

EURASIA
3 Russian Peacekeeping Operation in Nagorno-Karabakh
4 Few Elite in the Russian Military
5 Quadcopter UAVs to Be Used by Russian Ground Forces
6 Russian Coastal Defense Division Forming to Protect
Chukotka Peninsula and Northeast Entry to North Sea Route
7 Innovation in the Russian Military
8 Russia Strengthens Ties with Loyalist Christian Militias in Syria’s
Hama Province
10 Challenges Ahead for Turkish Air Force
12 The Future of the Turkish Air Force’s 5th-Generation Capabilities
14 A Turkish Perspective on Open Source Intelligence in the Digital
Age
16 Russia’s “Pole-21” Electronic Warfare System’s Role in Defeating
UAVs
20 Russian UAV Organization and Developments
24 Azerbaijan’s Post-War Exercise with Turkey
INDO-PACIFIC
26 China’s Concept of “Intelligentization”: Self-Teaching Systems
27 China’s Next Step in Modernization: Developing Effective
Integrated Joint Operations
29 President Xi issues 2021 Training Mobilization Order
30 Vietnamese Advisor Recalls Battle of the Paracel Islands with
China
31 Defense Expenditures in India
32 Indonesia Female Suicide Bomber Details Inter-Generational
Radicalization
34 A Young Singaporean Radical’s Disrupted Road to Militancy
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
36 Tensions Escalate between Kurds and the Syrian Regime
38 Zuljanah: Iran’s New Solid-Fuel Rocket
39 Iran: Enemies Will Be Destroyed with Missile Power
40 Iran: Reconstruction and Overhaul of Helicopters
41 Growing Iranian Influence Near the Border with Israel in
Southwest Syria
43 Continued Growth and Development in Domestic High-Tech
Military Industries of Saudi Arabia and the UAE
AFRICA
45 South Africa: Too Many High Ranking Officers, Too Little Money
46 Uganda: Museveni’s Strategic Use of Violence to Retain the
Presidency
47 Nigeria: Governor Wants Mercenaries to Combat Boko Haram
LATIN AMERICA
48 Mexico Arrests Police Accused of Human Rights Abuses
49 Colombia Creates Elite Commando Unit to Combat VenezuelaBased Rebels
50 Brazil’s Open Border Policy Runs into Steadfast Peru
53 Argentina Worried about Foreign Vessels in the South Atlantic

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION IS UNLIMITED

Volume 11
Issue #3
March 2021

The Foreign Military Studies Office
(FMSO) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
is part of the US Army Training and
Doctrine Command G-2, whose mission
is to Understand, Describe, Deliver, and
Assess the conditions of the Operational
Environment. For over 30 years, FMSO
has conducted open source research
on foreign perspectives of defense
and security issues, emphasizing
those topics that are understudied or
unconsidered.
Operational Environment Watch
provides translated selections with
background from a diverse range
of foreign media that our analysts
and expert contributors believe will
give security professionals an added
dimension to their critical thinking
about the Operational Environment.

OEWATCH
Foreign News & Perspectives
of the Operational Environment
Volume 11 | Issue 3

March | 2021

Regional Analysts and
Expert Contributors
Eurasia

Charles Bartles
Ray Finch
Les Grau
Ihsan Gündüz
Karen Kaya
Tom Wilhelm
Lucas Winter

Indo-Pacific

Cindy Hurst
Keven McCauley
Matthew Stein

The views expressed in each article are those of
the author and do not represent the official policy or
position of the Department of the Army, Department
of Defense, or the US Government. Release of this
information does not imply any commitment or intent
on the part of the US Government to provide any
additional information on any topic presented herein.
The appearance of hyperlinks does not constitute
endorsement by the US Army of the referenced site
or the information, products, or services contained
therein. Users should exercise caution in accessing
hyperlinks.
The Operational Environment Watch is archived
and available at: https://community.apan.org/wg/
tradoc-g2/fmso/.

ON THE COVER:
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Source: lawepw https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Riyadh,_Saudi_Arabia_(2048x1367)_(36864830374).jpg, Attribution: Public
domain, via Wikimedia Commons

Jacob Zenn
Middle East, North Africa

Ihsan Gündüz
Michael Rubin
Lucas Winter

Africa

Robert Feldman

Latin America

Ryan Berg
Dodge Billingsley
		

Editor-in-Chief

Tom Wilhelm

Editor

Dodge Billingsley

Design Editor

Thomas Tolare

EURASIA
Russian Peacekeeping Operation in Nagorno-Karabakh
OE Watch Commentary: From a military perspective, the recent Russian peacekeeping
operation in and around the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh has been declared
successful by the Russian media. In mid-November 2020, a Russian peacekeeping force of
some 2,000 soldiers deployed to both Karabakh and the Lachin corridor between Karabakh
and Armenia. As the brief excerpt from the military weekly Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer
points out, “in just a matter of weeks, Russian peacekeeping forces have created a full-fledged
security infrastructure there.” The article goes on to describe the evolution and development
of Russian peacekeeping forces as well as partial details from the current operation in and
around Nagorno-Karabakh.
The article begins by asserting that “since the beginning of the 90s, the [Russian] Armed
Forces have gained vast experience in disengaging the warring parties.” Early on, the Ministry Azerbaijani soldiers and Russian peacekeepers in Kelbadzhar
district, Karabakh, Azerbaijan. 25 Nov 2020.
Source: Russian Ministry of Defense (mil.ru) https://bit.ly/3jPcBVs , Attribution: CCA 4.0 Intl
of Defense (MoD) began to form “the first specialized peacekeeping units and subunits,” and
they were deployed to stem conflict in Abkhazia, Transnistria, and Tajikistan. The author recalls that in the mid-1990s “officers of the 589th
[Guards Motorized Rifle] Regiment received training programs under NATO’s Partnership for Peace program…,” during which some of the
“units traveled to the United States on several occasions to conduct joint exercises.” Some of these lessons, the articles claim, were used during
joint peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Kosovo. The author also describes some of the debate within the MoD about whether to create units
specifically designed to handle peacekeeping operations (largely airborne) or to merely designate and train specific units within military districts
to handle these types of missions. The result has been the creation of both dedicated peacekeeping units and nominal “peacekeeping units assigned
to each military district.”
The author describes the current composition of the units now deployed in Nagorno-Karabakh, stating that “the core of the Russian peacekeeping
force is made up of two brigades - the 15th Motorized Rifle and 31st Airborne Assault.” He asserts that “these units are constantly ready to carry
out the assigned peacekeeping tasks,” which according to the author, “have been completed accurately and on time.” The article concludes on
a positive note, asserting that “for three decades, the Russian peacekeeping forces have traveled a difficult path. Now these are highly efficient,
well-trained and well-equipped units, ready to help at any time,” a validation that peacekeeping remains a very active and evolving concept in
contemporary Russian military doctrine. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“The Russian Armed Forces currently have one of the most effective
peacekeeping forces in the world….”
Source: Pavel Ivanov, “Стража мирной жизни: Российские Вооруженные силы располагают самыми подготовленными и
эффективными миротворческими силами (Guardian of a peaceful life: The Russian Armed Forces have the most trained and efficient
peacekeeping forces),” Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer (a military weekly), 8 February 2021. https://vpk-news.ru/articles/60789
…Since the ceasefire in Karabakh, in just a matter of weeks, Russian peacekeeping forces have created a full-fledged security infrastructure there. These are
checkpoints, inspection points, specially equipped positions, headquarters, warehouses for the placement of humanitarian aid and other equally important objects.
From the first hours of the operation, the Russian peacekeepers established a peacekeeping service and the implementation of all agreements.
The Russian Armed Forces currently have one of the most effective peacekeeping forces in the world. They include several brigades, aviation squadrons and
battalions… also separate divisions, including medical, engineering, logistic…. Since the beginning of the 90s, the Armed Forces have gained vast experience in
disengaging the warring parties. At the same time, the formation of the first specialized peacekeeping units and subunits began…
…The 589th Guards Motorized Rifle Regiment (GMRR)… became the first peacekeeping unit of the Russian Armed Forces…. The regiment received peacekeeping
status at the end of 1992. Transnistria became the first region of responsibility of the 589th GMRR…. Later, the Volga peacekeepers began to fulfill their duties in
Abkhazia…
…In 1992, the 554th Airborne Battalion was formed specifically for operations on the territory of the former Yugoslavia…. In the mid-1990s, the military-political
leadership of Russia planned to actively use Russian peacekeepers abroad…. Therefore, officers of the 589th Regiment received training programs under NATO’s
Partnership for Peace program. The regiment’s units traveled to the United States on several occasions to conduct joint exercises. At the same time, the Russian
military-political leadership had plans to create separate regular peacekeeping forces….
…In 1996, the formation of peacekeeping forces began as part of the Airborne Forces. At the same time, a new position appeared in the command of the troops
- the deputy commander of the Airborne Forces for peacekeeping operations. In the same year, a new peacekeeping brigade was formed, deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and later deployed to Kosovo….
…Therefore, in 2016, a new reform of the peacekeeping forces of Russia started…. At the end of last year, the work was completed, and it is already possible to
evaluate its results. The core of the Russian peacekeeping force is made up of two brigades - the 15th Motorized Rifle and 31st Airborne Assault. These units are
constantly ready to carry out the assigned peacekeeping tasks. How successfully they can do this has been shown by the experience of the operation in NagornoKarabakh. All tasks were completed accurately and on time.
…At present, peacekeeping units are assigned to each military district for a certain period… If necessary, these battalions, companies and detachments can reinforce
the permanent peacekeeping forces. They also begin to act when the peacekeeping mission is long. This will allow rotation of personnel and ensure high readiness of
unused peacekeepers.
…For three decades, the Russian peacekeeping forces have traveled a difficult path. Now these are highly efficient, well-trained and well-equipped units and units that
are ready to help at any time.

OE Watch | March 2021

3

EURASIA
Few Elite in the Russian Military
OE Watch Commentary: Several recent polls indicate that Russian attitudes toward its armed forces and military service have improved
significantly over the past decade. Better pay, upgraded living conditions, and a persistent positive media image, combined with the state’s
successful portrayal of operations abroad, are restoring the status of those in military uniform. Many young Russians, especially from poorer
regions, now regard military service as a social lift, either for pursuing a private sector or civil service career. However, as a recent article in the
popular pro-Kremlin daily Komsomolskaya Pravda suggests, the Russian elite does not fully share this positive attitude toward military service. In
the accompanying excerpt, military journalist Victor Baranets describes why the son of a wealthy businessman recently decided to join the army
and the wider message it sent to Russian society.
Baranets begins by recounting a conversation with a senior Ministry of Defense official, whereupon he learned “that the famous Russian
businessman - billionaire Alexei Mordashov, when sending his son into the army, persistently asked him to pick ‘a real unit’ where he will not have
indulgences and where the harsh army school will make a real man and a good specialist out of him.” The son complied and is now in basic training
and then will be sent to a regular engineering unit. According to the article, the new recruit has discovered that military service now includes “a
warm barracks with all the amenities, showers, and where we are fed like at a buffet!” Baranets goes on to explain that Mordashov’s son “joined
the army after being expelled from the Higher School of Economics, where he studied for a year.”
Baranets concludes the article by asking rhetorically, what other “children and grandchildren of famous people in Russia today have served in
the army?” and ruefully replies, “there are not many of them.” He lists but a handful of recent examples of elite sons who have donned a military
uniform. Reader comments to this article are mostly indignant, pointing out that in today’s Russia the elite appear to operate with a different set of
rules, asking for instance, “by law, isn’t he supposed to serve?” Another reader complains, “the list of honest guys from the top is too small.” While
the status of Russian military soldier has risen considerably over the past ten years, elite representation within the ranks remains an exception to
the rule. End OE Watch Commentary (Finch)

“Children and grandchildren of famous people in Russia today have served in
the army? There are not many of them….”
Source: Victor Baranets, “Миллиардер отправил сына в армию — поучиться жизни (The billionaire sent his son to the army – to learn
about life),” Komsomolskaya Pravda (popular pro-Kremlin daily), 14 January 2021. https://www.kp.ru/daily/27226/4352384/
…Well done father, he directed his son along the right path. This decision can only command respect, - I heard these words during a
telephone conversation with one of the military leaders of the Ministry of Defense. From him I learned that the famous Russian businessman billionaire Alexei Mordashov, sending his son into the army, persistently asked Nikita to pick ‘a real unit’ where he will not have indulgences
and where the harsh army school will make a real man and a good specialist out of him…”
As a result, he was sent to the ‘training’ (educational unit), where he is now preparing to take the oath. And then he will be sent to one of
the engineering units. Where is she stationed? “In Central Russia,” the Defense Ministry told me. More precisely, they refused to name the
coordinates….
Nikita also confessed to his colleagues that he did not expect to “see an army like this.” At the Higher School of Economics (Higher School
of Economics), they say, they told him horror stories about the service, and here “a warm barracks with all the amenities, showers, and where
we are fed like at a buffet!”
It is worth noting that the son of the billionaire Mordashov joined the army after being expelled from the Higher School of Economics, where
he studied for a year….
MILITARY DOSSIER “KP”
Children and grandchildren of famous people in Russia today have served in the army?
There are not many of them….
…Nikita is the son of the famous writer Sergei Mikhalkov: a famous film actor and film director, served in the Pacific Fleet. In the same
place, in the Far East, the grandson of Mikhalkov Sr., Stepan (in the naval unit of the border troops), also served.
The son of the first deputy chairman of the board of VTB and chairman of the board of directors of FC Dynamo Vasily Titov was called up to
serve after graduation.
The son of the First Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation Igor Shuvalov served on Russky Island in the naval special forces of
the Pacific Fleet. The son of the former governor of the Amur Region, Oleg Kozhemyako (now the governor of the Primorsky Territory), also
pulled a strap in the ranks of the marines.
Reader replies:
By law, isn’t he supposed to serve?...
The list of honest guys from the top is too small….
OE Watch | March 2021

4

EURASIA
Quadcopter UAVs to Be Used by Russian Ground Forces
OE Watch Commentary: According to the well-known military journalists Anton Lavrov and Roman Kretsul on the staff of the pro-Kremlin
daily newspaper Izvestia, Russian ground reconnaissance forces will be issued small, limited-range quadcopters en masse this year. According
to the article, these drones have already been issued and utilized in limited number. In September 2020 they were used in exercises by Russian
ground forces at a military base in South Ossetia, a breakaway region of Republic of Georgia. That exercise and others revealed that quadcopters,
while a valuable reconnaissance asset, have short range and time of flight and are vulnerable to jamming and ground fire. Still, quadcopters should
prove valuable in urban combat and scouting ahead in mountainous terrain. It was also noted that the system is unpopular with dismounted soldiers
who have to tote it for long distances in addition to the basic required kit. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“Based upon Ministry of Defense information, the number of state-of-theart unmanned aerial vehicles in the ground forces has increased 70-fold as
compared to 2012, when their mass purchases began.”

Source: Anton Lavrov and Roman Kretsul, “С дроном в разведку: стартует массовое оснащение армии квадрокоптерами
(Reconnaissance by drone: Large issue of Quadcopters to Ground Force in 2021),” Izvestia (pro-Kremlin daily newspaper), 15 January 2021.
https://iz.ru/1111609/anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul/s-dronom-v-razvedku-startuet-massovoe-osnashchenie-armii-kvadrokopterami
Mass delivery of quadcopter-unmanned aerial vehicles for the ground forces will begin this year. The small, light aircraft will help the troops
accomplish combat missions and daily tasks. They will augment the 2,000 fixed-wing drones deployed in the units right now. Although these
quadcopters have shortcomings, they can turn out to be especially useful in reconnaissance. Until recently; inexpensive commercial UAVs
were portrayed as a weapon of the guerrillas. In particular, extremists used them in quantity during engagements in Syria and Iraq.
The delivery of quadcopters to the troops will begin this year. They will be issued to reconnaissance companies and battalions. The new
drones will be used for combat and in daily activities. For example, they can observe the conduct of drills and the unit’s area.
In 2019, the army conducted an experiment on the use of small copters. The majority of them were sent to Eastern Military District units.
Several sets of items were also transferred to the other military districts. The test results were announced as successful at the end of last year.
The experiment ascertained that the UAVs have a shorter range and flight duration and are more vulnerable to the impact of electronic
warfare systems and fire from the ground than the UAVs that are in the inventory. However, they can take off and land on any area and are
capable of hovering over the same location for a long time, are simple to control, and are reasonably priced.
In September of last year, the Ministry of Defense reported on first use of quadcopters at reconnaissance subunits’ exercises of the 4th
Military Base in South Ossetia. They used the drones to adjust fire and conducted an assessment of the targets’ destruction. The UAVs came
in handy for both the riflemen and the tank crewmen.
The Eastern Military District Railroad Troops Brigade used them for other tasks. During the fall exercises, they employed the quadcopter
for the rapid and precise determination of the locations of the destruction of a railroad track by an enemy saboteur-reconnaissance team and
for the assessment of the complexity of the impending work.
“Small quadcopters can be used in reconnaissance,” Colonel Valeriy Yuryev, the Deputy Chairman of the Russian Union of Airborne
Troops, stated. “One can effectively launch them from command posts or from vehicles on the march. But the drone turned out to be
unnecessary weight for dismounted reconnaissance teams. We need to test the UAVs at exercises of various levels. We also should not forget
that everything is not exactly the same in maneuvers as in actual combat. Active countermeasures from the enemy occur and strikes are
conducted against the launch sites.
Not only regular armies but also terrorists assessed the utility of small quadcopters in military affairs. During the defeat of their groupings
in Syria and Iraq, dozens of Chinese-made quadcopters were seized from the extremists’ bunkers. The guerrillas used them to conduct
reconnaissance and attack targets. Small improvised bombs were suspended under the unmanned aerial vehicles. They managed to inflict
losses to personnel, disable equipment, and even to blow up munitions dumps.

OE Watch | March 2021

5

EURASIA
Russian Coastal Defense Division Forming to Protect
Chukotka Peninsula and Northeast Entry to North Sea Route
OE Watch Commentary: According to the excerpted article from the pro-Kremlin daily Izvestia, a Russian Coastal Defense Division will
protect the northeast entry into Russia’s Arctic northern sea route. The Northern Fleet controls the western approaches to Russia’s northern sea
route through most of its Arctic coastline and waters. The article indicates the dividing line between the Northern and Pacific fleets’ areas of
responsibility is Wrangel Island. The United States disputes Russian claims to much of the Arctic Ocean and northern sea route as national waters,
stating that they are international waters not under Russian jurisdiction. The weakest Russian control of this vast area has been the northeast entry
point. The establishment of a coastal defense division is designed to strengthen Russian claims in this area. End OE Watch Commentary (Grau)

“The Ministry of Defense is creating a coastal defense division on
Chukotka Peninsula. The first regiment, which has gone on alert
duty, was formed at the end of last year. The formation will begin
to patrol the coast and will be issued everything needed to repel an
amphibious assault. The new unit’s area of operation will extend
along the Northern Maritime Route right up to Wrangel Island.
The formation should provide safer navigation in the region.”

Source: Anton Lavrov and Roman Kretsul, “Нужен берег чукотский: северо-восток России защитит новая дивизия (New division
protects northeast Russia’s Chukotka shores),” Izvestia (pro-Kremlin daily), 4 February 2021.
https://iz.ru/1120276/roman-kretcul-anton-lavrov-aleksei-ramm/nuzhen-bereg-chukotskii-severo-vostok-rossii-zashchitit-novaia-diviziia
The Ministry of Defense is creating a coastal defense division on Chukotka Peninsula. The first regiment, which has gone on alert duty, was formed at
the end of last year. The formation will begin to patrol the coast and will be issued everything needed to repel an amphibious assault. The new unit’s
area of operation will extend along the Northern Maritime Route right up to Wrangel Island. The formation should provide safer navigation in the region.
Sources in the Military Department told Izvestiya that the formation of the division began at the end of last year. The first coastal defense regiment has
already been deployed on Chukotka. Monitoring the coast along the Northern Maritime Route is its important mission. The unit that is being formed in
the region, where snow lies and strong winds blow for nine months in the year, will get special equipment - snowmobiles, modular life support systems,
and the mobile field kitchen all-terrain vehicles. When the division will be completely manned and ready to perform its mission has not been announced.
Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu discussed the creation of a division on Chukotka in 2016. Unique subunits would use four and six-wheeled ATVs
to patrol the coast and to prevent the landing of saboteurs. In the event of a large-scale enemy amphibious assault, the arctic infantry would rapidly
advance to the threatened axis and join the battle from the march. In December 2020, the Defense Minister reported on the formation of the first regiment
in the region. xxxx
According to military expert Vikton Murakhovskiy, “The division will be able to cover the Air Defense facilities, which are deployed in the region. But
the main mission is to support navigation along the Northern Maritime Route. The transit of some Northern Fleet ships to the Pacific Ocean along this
route was part of the “Vostok-2018” Exercises. This is a major strategic mission for the Navy, which has four fleets. It is important to have a formation
on Chukotka, which is capable of providing both defense and the coverage of this axis.”
According to Admiral Valentin Selivanov, the former Chief of the Russian Navy Main Staff, with the creation of the division on Chukotka, navigation
along the Northern Maritime Route will become safer. “A division - is the most powerful tactical formation, which is capable of operating independently.
It can accomplish various missions. Foreign vessels, especially military ships, cannot sail along the Northern Maritime Route without Russia’s
authorization. If some vessel violates this rule, our servicemen will be able to board it from a helicopter or from small craft and conduct an inspection.
…
Chukotka has once again become a center of military activity in the country’s northeast during the last five years. The renovation of Ugolnyy Airfield
in Anadyr supports all types of aircraft and helicopters. They not only provide the defense of the borders but are also involved in the supply of the more
remote garrisons.
…
In December of 2020, the Ministry of Defense reported on the initiation of permanent combat alert at Anadyr by Naval Aviation MiG-31BM fighterinterceptors from the aviation regiment on Kamchatka. UAV subunits with “Orlan-10” and “Forpost” drones have also been performing alert duty at
Ugolnyy for several years. They permit the monitoring of not only the peninsula but also its coastal waters.
A composite army aviation detachment has been located on Kamchatka for five years. Mi-8 And Mi-26 transport helicopters assist in the supply of the
subunits on Mys Shmidta and on Wrangel Island. They have tested the latest arctic modification of the Mi-8AMTSh-VA, which was specially developed for
operation in the most difficult conditions of the Far North.
Russia has been actively strengthening the Navy’s coastal forces in recent years. The naval infantry formation has been reorganized and transformed
into rapid reaction troops, which are capable of operating throughout the entire world. They are upgrading the Coastal Missile-Artillery Troops from the
obsolete “Redut” and “Rubezh” complexes to the latest “Bastion” and “Bal” complexes. Furthermore, state-of-the-art battalions are being formed and
the coastal missile regiments are being transformed into full-fledged brigades.

OE Watch | March 2021

6

EURASIA
Innovation in the Russian Military
OE Watch Commentary: There is an expression in the Russian military
that goes “no good initiative goes unpunished.” It is always delivered in the
context of that ironic foxhole humor shared by military members worldwide.
However, things may be changing and in a particular general staff fashion.
In a recent article in the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Военная Мысль,
senior military theorist Dr. General-lieutenant V.V. Trushin exhorts a change
in Russia’s military culture to develop more “creative approaches” and
“innovation” in operational art and planning. In accordance with the practice
of Russian military science—ultimately the framework for change and
transformation in the armed forces—Trushin’s article provides a foundational
historical analysis of Russian and non-Russian military events. His examples
of successful innovations in operational planning and execution range from
Suvorov in the Russo-Turkish War of 1787-92 to Napoleon when he was still
a captain at Toulon to Zhukov and Popov in the Second World War. He ends
by praising the creativity of Syria’s General Suheil al-Hasan in the current
conflict.

Emblem of the Russian Ministry of Defense.
Source: Public Domain

According the article, the development of initiative and innovation is aimed at “commanding generals and commanders at all levels.” Unlike
in the U.S. Army, which rotates individuals through many specialties, including command, Russian commanders stay close to their military
track. Additionally, the purpose of initiative is noted to be specifically to “accomplish the combat mission with fewer forces, minimal losses, and
short timelines,” not to accomplish the mission in a broader way that involves empowering the total force. The approach to develop this focused
initiative is to master and apply “the requirements of regulations.” This last bit is not mere phraseology. The Russian outlook on tactics is a very
deliberate and binding system. It is intended to be uniformly mastered by all at the tactical levels, which go through the division. This tactical
reliability provides a common operational foundation and allows operational flexibility in planning and execution. Within that context and also
the consolidating nature of comand and control developments, Trushin’s notion of command initiative can be seen as an aspirational enhancement
to command leadership in combat and not necessarily a revolution to the concept of mission command in army affairs overall. End OE Watch
Commentary (Wilhelm)

“Each commander must be the enemy of the template, all the more
so such templates and such plans that are well known to the enemy.”

Source: V.V. Trushin “О творческом подходе к управлению войсками (силам) (The Innovative Approach to Command and Control of
Troops (Forces)),” Военная Мысль (The Russian Ministry of Defense’s journal of military theory), No. 8 2020, p. 6.
The nature of modern military conflicts requires from commanding generals and commanders at all levels an innovative approach toward
the management of combat operations and the command and control troops (forces) during those operations. We must admit, however, that
this requirement is not properly understood by some military leaders. In their opinion, the command and control of troops (forces) in combat
is not conducive to the manifestation of creativity, and in modern combat they simply have no time to engage in it, since all efforts should be
directed toward the execution of the task assigned, primarily using reliable and proven methods.

OE Watch | March 2021

7

EURASIA
Russia Strengthens Ties with Loyalist Christian Militias in
Syria’s Hama Province
OE Watch Commentary: Leaders of the Russian military campaign in Syria are exploiting socio-cultural linkages to local Christian Orthodox
communities to increase its influence in the country. Prior to Russian intervention, the Syrian regime, with assistance from Iran, was able to
portray itself as the defender of minorities against the mostly Sunni rebellion. Russia’s entry into the conflict and its self-portrayal as the defender
of Christians in the Middle East has made Russia an attractive patron to Syria’s Christian communities. The relationship is synergistic, as several
Christian militias have proven to be effective and reliable throughout the conflict. As highlighted in the first accompanying article, from the
independent Lebanese news site al-Modon, Russian military leaders’ cultivation of ties with loyalist Christian militia seems to bypass the Syrian
regime entirely, raising questions about Russia’s preference for dealing with communal leaders over going through the labyrinth of corruption in
the Syrian regime.
Noteworthy in this regard are the blossoming ties between Russian military leadership and militia leaders in Christian towns in the central
province of Hama. Russian military-religious delegations have been consistently visiting central Hama’s Christian communities since 2019, and
Russian connections to the local National Defense Forces (NDF) militias have strengthened. Nabeul al-Abdullah, the head of the NDF in the town
of al-Suqaylabiyah (Saqalbiyah), and Simon al-Wakil, his counterpart in the nearby town of Mahardah (Muhardeh), both meet regularly with top
Russian military leadership in Syria. As the passage from the Zaman al-Wasl Syrian opposition news website describes, the two leaders were
recently invited to a ceremony honoring Roman Filipov, the Russian fighter pilot whose plane was shot down by Turkish jets in 2018.
Al-Suqaylabiyah is a town of nearly 20,000 residents, located in Syria’s al-Ghab plain, a fertile depression fed by the Orontes River that divides
Sunni Idlib Province from the Shia Alawite-majority coastal mountains. The town’s location near the frontline with Turkish-backed Sunni rebels
in Idlib gives added meaning to Russia’s use of Christian symbolism in establishing a partnership with local warlords. Last summer, a Russian
delegation agreed to help build a replica of the Hagia Sophia in al-Suqaylabiyah, as a purported response to Turkey’s decision to revert the original
in Istanbul from museum to mosque. The church is to be built on land donated by Nabeul al-Abdullah, the head of the local NDF. End OE Watch
Commentary (Winter)

“The delegation was headed by the priest of the Hmeimim base,
Father Michael, as well as officers from the Special Forces…”

Al-Ghab Plain Viewed from Al-Suqaylabiyah.

Source: s.i.dahir, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%BA%D8%A7%D8%A8_%D9%85%D9%86_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B3%D9%82%D
9%8A%D9%84%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%A9_-_panoramio.jpg, Attribution: CC BY-SA 3.0

OE Watch | March 2021

8

EURASIA
Continued: Russia Strengthens Ties with Loyalist Christian
Militias in Syria’s Hama Province
Source:

“‫روسيا تحمي مسيحيي املرشق وتبني آيا صوفيا يف السقيلبية‬

(Russia Protects Eastern Christians and Builds a ‘Hagia Sofia’ in al-Suqaylabiyah),” al-Modon (pro-Syrian opposition, independent Lebanese
news website), 27 July 2020. https://tinyurl.com/11uxsvml

According to the information, a military delegation from the Russian Hmeimim base met with officials in the National Defense militia,
including Nabeul al-Abdullah and Simon al-Wakil, in the city of al-Suqaylabiyah. According to the National Defense militia’s page, the
delegation visited a number of Christian schools and churches and met religious figures in a tour organized by al-Abdullah for the delegation
in al-Suqaylabiyah. Visits of Russian officers and clerics to the city have been taking place since the beginning of this year, which has sparked
a lot of speculation and analysis in the Syrian opposition press and the Russian press alike, about Moscow’s crumbling relations with the
Syrian regime and its preference for supporting local militias…
The Christian towns and villages in Hama, which are relatively close to Idlib Province, have always had a Russian presence to protect
Christians. In recent years, pictures and videos have spread of Russian humanitarian aid being distributed there, in parallel with
disagreements between humanitarian organizations run by Asma al-Assad and others run by Christian activists like that of media figure
Maggy Khouzam, who accused the regime at the time of subservience to Shiite Iran at the expense of properly protecting minorities…
Source:

“‫روسيا ت ُكثف اجتامعاتها مع قادة ميليشيات مسيحيني يف ريف حامة‬

(Russia Intensifies Meetings with Christian Militia Leaders in Rural Hama),” Zaman al-Wasl (Syrian opposition news website), 9 February
2021. shttps://www.zamanalwsl.net/news/article/134615/

On Monday, Russian forces at the Hmeimim base, led by General Dmitry Valerievich Glushenkov, honored the leaders of Russian-supported
“National Defense” militias from cities in the northwestern countryside of Hama, in addition to the commander of a new military formation
established by Russia in Syria…
A few days before this, a Russian Christian religious delegation from the Hmeimim air base visited the farm of Nabeul al-Abdullah, the
commander of the “National Defense” militia in the city of al-Suqaylabiyah. The delegation was headed by the priest of the Hmeimim base,
Father Michael, as well as officers from the Special Forces. The Russian delegation inspected construction work on the (Hagia Sophia)
Church, the foundation stone of which was laid last July, with the support of the Russian Duma…
On January 28, the commander of the Russian forces in Syria invited Nabeul al-Abdullah and Simon al-Wakil, leaders of the National
Defense militias, to a ceremony held at Hmeimim base, to inaugurate a memorial to the Russian pilot (Roman Filippov) who was killed in
February 2018, while on a sortie to carry out airstrikes in the Idlib area…
In the middle of January this year, officers of the Russian Special Forces met with an Iranian general operating in the western Hama
countryside. The meeting was hosted by Nabel al-Abdullah, commander of the National Defense militia, at his headquarters on his private
farm on the outskirts of al-Suqaylabiyah, to celebrate the New Year. It was preceded two weeks earlier by a meeting in the city of alSuqaylabiyah bringing together the commander of the Russian Forces in Syria, Aleksandr Chuyko, and the commander of the 25th Division of
the Russian army, with al-Abdullah and other militia leaders and officials of the Christian community in the region.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | March 2021

9

EURASIA
Challenges Ahead for Turkish Air Force
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying report
from edam.org.tr, an independent Turkish think thank
based in Istanbul, evaluates Turkey’s removal from the
F-35 fighter jet program and how this will impact Turkey’s
airpower over the next decade. Specifically, the report
discusses how Turkey’s loss of the F-35 will leave it
without a nextgeneration fighter jet and curtail the fighting
capabilities of the Turkish Air Force (TAF).
The report’s main finding is that TAF will face serious
military-technological challenges well beyond the next
decade if Turkey does not acquire a next-generation stealth
fighter jet. To mitigate these challenges, the report makes
several observations for decision-makers to consider.
First, a return to the F-35 program seems to be essential to
maintain TAF air superiority in coming years and Turkey
should try to find a way to rejoin the program.

General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon Turkish.

Source: Robert Sullivan, via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:General_Dynamics_F-16_Fighting_Falcon_Turkish_(remix).
jpg, Attribution: Public Domain, US Air Force

Second, TAF relies on fourth-generation F-16s and
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in its cross-border operations. Considering the trends among regional players in acquiring more technologically
advanced fighter jets, Turkey should also look for interim solutions and alternatives to the F-35 so that TAF continues to maintain its advanced
fighting capabilities.
Third, the F-35 fighter jet has the potential to play an important role in detecting enemy ballistic missile activity with its ability to infiltrate
enemy airspace and its powerful detection sensors. Exclusion from the F-35 fighter jet program and inability to acquire next-generation fighter jets
immediately from elsewhere will create defense challenges for Turkey against the ballistic missile capabilities of regional rivals.
Fourth, the idea that Turkey will be able to replace fifth-generation fighter jet capabilities with UAVs is not well-founded because UAVs will not
be able to replace or replicate these capabilities.
Fifth, Turkey’s plan to develop its first indigenous stealth fighter jet (TF-X National Combat Aircraft) is unlikely to show any significant
technological progress in the next two decades because it has not moved beyond the preliminary design phase, with no engine options to power
the aircraft. Turkish decision-makers should keep this reality in mind while assessing Turkey’s airpower capabilities.
Sixth, Turkey’s indigenous amphibious assault ship TCG Anadolu has been configured as a light aircraft carrier capable of operating the F-35B
aircraft, so decision-makers should consider the implications of being removed from the F-35 program on other defense projects when considering
their options.
Finally, the article argues that the political-military decision-makers should pay attention to the deficiencies in air defenses of Turkish military
bases abroad in the context of advanced technological capabilities in new fighter jets. End OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“Turkey’s fifth generation National Combat Aircraft will not be entering the inventory or
creating a meaningful deterrence over the next two decades… if no interim solution is found,
Turkish air power will fall behind trends in the world.”

OE Watch | March 2021

10

EURASIA
Continued: Challenges Ahead for Turkish Air Force
Source: “Dr. Can Kasapoğlu, “Türk Hava Gücünün En Zor On Yılı: Hava Harp Trendleri, Tehdit Ortamı Analizi ve Türk Hava Kuvvetleri’nin
5. Nesil Geleceği (The Hardest Decade of Turkish Air Force: Air Warfare Trends, Threat Environment Analysis and the 5th Generation Future
of the Turkish Air Force),” edam.org.tr (an independent Turkish think thank based in Istanbul), 18 January 2020. https://edam.org.tr/turkhava-gucunun-en-zor-on-yili-hava-harp-trendleri-tehdit-ortami-analizi-ve-turk-hava-kuvvetlerinin-5-nesil-gelecegi/
The Turkish Air Force and Turkey’s air warfare capabilities face a serious test over the next 10-20 year. At the heart of this test is advanced
technological problems... when regional armament trends are taken into consideration, for the Turkish Air Force to survive the critical
geopolitical challenges with a 4th generation [fighter jet] will not be easy.
…
…the Turkish Air Force currently relies heavily on 4th generation F-16s as a fixed-wing combat platform... the 5th generation F-35 Joint
Strike Aircraft was going to be included in the inventory, but now it is not possible due to the purchase of the S-400 … from the Russian
Federation. Turkey’s fifth generation National Combat Aircraft will not be entering the inventory or creating a meaningful deterrence in the
next two decades… In summary, if no interim solution is found, Turkish air power will fall behind trends in the world.
…
Regional armament patterns need to be carefully examined…
Another source of threat to the Turkish Forces is from ballistic missiles… especially… in the Middle East. Besides Iran, which is traditionally
a source of ballistic missile threat, there are intelligence indications that the Syrian Arab Armed Forces are … strengthening their ballistic
missile capabilities.
…
In addition to the ballistic missile threat, the deployed Turkish Armed Forces and military bases abroad increasingly require a serious air
defense system…
…
A return to the F-35 project...is essential. Although we have analyzed the ‘why’ of the said return..., the solution on ‘how’ to make the return
requires a diplomatic assessment...

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | March 2021

11

EURASIA
The Future of the Turkish Air Force’s 5th-Generation
Capabilities
OE Watch Commentary: The inventory of the Turkish Air Force (TAF) includes 240 F-16s, 20-30 F-4 Phantoms modernized by Israel, E-7s,
tankers, and ISR support aircraft, creating a formidable deterrent and combat force in the region. With the help of its armed drones, this force has
achieved significant successes in the past year against Russian forces in Syria, Emirati and Russian forces in Libya, and in support of Azerbaijan
in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. It has shown its ability to influence the outcomes of conflicts in the Middle East and beyond.
As the following excerpted report from the Istanbul-based independent think tank Ekonomi ve Dış Politika Araştırmalar Merkezi discusses,
Turkey has been developing its own 5th-generation fixed-wing combat aircraft for delivery in 2030. Even then it will be a while, probably until
2040, before a significant number of these enter the TAF inventory to create a significant deterrent force. Originally, Turkey was part of the
5thgeneration F-35 program, which would bridge the gap in terms of 5th-generation capabilities until 2030-2040. However, Turkey’s removal from
the F-35 program due to its purchase of Russian S-400s creates a decades-long capability gap. The author of the first accompanying passage calls
this “a techno-generational problem” that will cause a serious challenge for the TAF over the next decade. Meanwhile, armed forces in the region-such as those of Israel, Egypt and Greece--are investing heavily in modernization or acquiring new 5th-generation combat aircraft. Neighboring
Greece is modernizing its F-16s and trying to obtain F-35s.
In this context, the TAF has had to take some steps to maximize its capabilities. It appears that it has decided the most realistic and economical
way to bridge this gap is to modernize the F-16s in its inventory. As the second passage discusses, Turkey’s F-16 Block 30s are undergoing serious
structural modernization as part of the ÖZGÜR [FREEDOM] project, which entails 35 F-16 Block 30 planes being updated with national avionics
and nationally developed software. Some of the most noteworthy modernization upgrades include an inertial navigation system, a national IFF
(friend and foe identification system), and the ASEA radar (airborne search/track/fire/control radar) by Turkey’s defense giant ASELSAN. With
these upgrades, the life of the F-16 Block 30s will be extended by 20 years (or 4000 flight hours). Once the F-16 Block 30s are modernized, the
Block 40s and 50s will undergo the same modernization updates. In this way, the TAF aims to migitate the capability gap between platforms so
that it can continue to affect outcomes of conflicts as it has in and around the Middle East. End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“The Turkish Air Force and Turkey’s air combat capabilities face a serious
challenge over the next 10-20 years.”

HAF F-16C Block 30 - SN 132.

Source: stefg74 from Larisa, Greece via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HAF_F-16C_
Block_30_-_SN_132.jpg, Attribution: CC BY 2.0

OE Watch | March 2021

12

EURASIA
Continued: The Future of the Turkish Air Force’s 5thGeneration Capabilities
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoğlu, “Türk Hava Gücünün En Zor On Yılı: Hava Harp Trendleri, Tehdit Ortamı Analizi ve Türk Hava Kuvvetleri’nin
5. Nesil Gelecegi (The Turkish Air Force’s Toughest Decade: Air Combat Trends, Threat Environment Analysis and the Future of the Turkish
Air Forces’ 5th Generation [Capabilities]),” Ekonomi ve Dış Politika Araştırmalar Merkezi (EDAM- Center for Economic and Foreign Policy
Research, an independent think-tank based in Istanbul), January 2021. https://edam.org.tr/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/CAN_Turk-HavaGucu-TR.pdf
The Turkish Air Force and Turkey’s air combat capabilities face a serious challenge over the next 10-20 years. The challenge is based
categorically on a techno-generational problem. Considering the regional weaponization trends, and the fact that the Turkish Air Forces are
limited to 4th generation capabilities, it will not be easy for Turkey to overcome the critical geopolitical challenges it faces.
Currently, many air forces in the world (e.g. UK, US, Israel) are flying 5th generation platforms (e.g. F-35). Some other air forces are making
purchases to achieve some mid-range solutions referred to as 4.5 or 4++ generation platforms (e.g. Greece [Rafale], Egypt [Su35]). Yet some
other countries who are producers and operators of the 4.5 generation platforms are relying on these mid-range solutions to plan for their 6th
generation air force for the 2040s (e.g. France and Germany with their 6th generational projects and Sweden with its Tempest Project under
London’s leadership).
While these trends are being observed around the world, the Turkish Air Force currently relies mainly on the 4th generation F-16s as a
winged combat platform (the lesser numbered modernized F-4 2020s are close to the end of their life). Under normal circumstances, the
5th generation F-35 Joint Combat Plane was to enter our inventory; but due to the purchase of S-400 strategic SAM systems, this capability
will not be achieved. Turkey’s other 5th generation project, the National Combat Plane, will only start creating a meaningful deterrent force
sometime will be between 2030 and 2040. In sum, unless a solution is found, the Turkish Air Force may fall behind global trends.

Source: “F-16 Block 30’lara 20 yıl ek ömür (F-16 Block 30’s get an additional 20 years of life),” YouTube/Tolga Özbek (an independent
Turkish defense / air force expert), 1 February 2021. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pXhav4X0q0w
Turkish F-16 Block 30s are being structurally modernized….
…Those that have exceeded 7000 flight hours are being modernized…. The goal is to add another 4000 flight hours to the plane’s life. This
is equivalent to about 20 years of life. So this modernization enables Turkish F-16 Block 30’s to be used until 2041. This means that until the
national combat plane enters the force in 2030, and their number increases until 2040, the Block 30’s will be able to bridge the gap.
What about the systems? This is where the ÖZGÜR project comes in. It is a serious modernization project that targets the avionic
modernization of the planes. …. The cockpit is changed, an inertial navigation system is installed, national IFF system [identification friend
and foe], and the ASELSAN ASEA radar is installed. This radar can follow multiple targets at once and convey images to the pilot so that he
is aware of all the planes around it….
The Block 40s and Block 50s, will also eventually be modernized under the ÖZGÜR project.

Fangs of the Lone Wolf is about combat experience
in urban, mountain and fairly open terrain. It is not
a comprehensive history of conflict. This book is a
series of snapshots — of vignettes — describing the
difficulty, the hardship, the victories and the defeats
of the participants. It is an examination of the raw
data of combat in a foreign land, and is aimed to
advance the professional military study of conflict.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195587/download
OE Watch | March 2021

13

EURASIA
A Turkish Perspective on Open Source Intelligence in the
Digital Age
OE Watch Commentary: Information is a key domain in competition and conflict. The digital age is transforming the collection and
dissemination of information, specifically open source intelligence, as discussed in the accompanying article written by a leading Turkish defense
expert and published by Anadolu Ajans, Turkey’s state-run news agency. With the rise of social media platforms, footage from smartphones and
drones, as well as imagery from commercial satellites, militaries and governments no longer control the raw intelligence that is collected, assessed,
and disseminated from battlefields. Some countries have banned or limited smartphones and selfies from the battlefield, but this is not easy given
the rise of wars involving proxies, paramilitaries, and private contractors and the civilians among them. Furthermore, a force may also lack all the
information it needs to have the advantage in waging its preferred way of war and to avoid being manipulated by its adversary. The author argues
that this new reality requires the field of open source intelligence to adapt to a new strategic environment where private companies, think tanks,
and research institutes are included in the process. Intelligence gathered by commercial satellites and private think tanks, which utilize a variety
of social media platforms, may provide critical insight. He points out that some nations have already started outsourcing some of their research
activities to emerging open source intelligence providers and concludes by saying “any nation that lags behind along this path will have to fight,
sooner or later, with bows and arrows against gunpowder.” End OE Watch Commentary (Kaya)

“Contemporary open source intelligence trends are driven

not by governments but private intelligence companies, think
tanks, and research institutions…”

ORSIS T-5000 .338LM.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin via Vitalykuzmin.net, http://vitalykuzmin.net/?q=node/35, Attribution: CC by ND-NC-4.0

OE Watch | March 2021

14

EURASIA
Continued: A Turkish Perspective on Open Source
Intelligence in the Digital Age
Source: Dr. Can Kasapoğlu, “Re-thinking open-source intelligence in the information age and digital change,” Anadolu Ajansı (Turkey’s
state-run news agency), 28 January 2021. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/analysis/analysis-re-thinking-open-source-intelligence-in-the-informationage-and-digital-change/2125883
…With the digital age on the rise, the world of intelligence has been undergoing profound change. Technology and growing interconnectivity
remain at the epicenter of this reshuffle
…The first thing to grasp is the internet, social media, and similar platforms, and their roles in harvesting raw intel from battlegrounds.
At present, every single armed conflict has an ‘internet front’ and an information geopolitics dimension, – or the ‘infosphere’ – where
the war continues to be fought by other means. This front is also an intelligence arena for gathering data, analyzing information, and
manipulating the adversary.
The introduction of smartphones and social media to war zones marked the belle époque of open-source intelligence (OSINT) gathering for
analysts. A few years ago, regular personnel and private military contractors connected to the Russian campaign in eastern Ukraine offered,
unintentionally, many hints about their geo-locations and combat mission characteristics as well as the delivery of weapons to the proxies on
the ground. Likewise, the Syrian Arab Army personnel’s social media posts have long helped us identify arms, units, and key commanders
during the Assad forces’ campaigns. Such trends now pertain to nearly all conflicts in every corner of the world.
...While military forces around the world are struggling to keep their secrets -- while fighting actual wars in the meantime -- they have a
tough uphill battle ahead of them. Selfie bans can work for elite units and their highly-trained and well-disciplined elements. Yet, hybrid
warfare incorporates a large number of proxies, private military contractors, and paramilitaries. Dictating a digital discipline on these
formations would not be easy.
.. the trends in drone proliferation and their implications for social media must also be carefully watched. … Another revolutionary change
in OSINT remains in imagery intelligence through commercial satellites. Today, think tanks, private intelligence firms and even journalism
benefit from satellite imagery when assessing high-value geopolitical issues such as Iran-harvested militancy close to the Golan Heights or
North Korean missile sites.
…Contemporary open-source intelligence trends are driven not by governments but private intelligence companies, think tanks, and research
institutions… Some nations’ intelligence and foreign and security policy offices have already started outsourcing some of their research
activities to emerging OSINT providers and analysts.
When defining a nation’s intelligence community or strategic community, one must now count non-governmental parts of it too. And, any
nation that lags behind along this path will have to fight, sooner or later, with bows and arrows against gunpowder.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download

OE Watch | March 2021

15

EURASIA
Russia’s “Pole-21” Electronic Warfare System’s Role in
Defeating UAVs
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya, a large-circulation pro-Kremlin daily newspaper, discusses the
fielding of Russia’s Pole-21 electronic warfare (EW) system. Unlike most EW systems, which are typically mounted on a vehicle (truck, aircraft,
ship, etc.), the Pole-21 is a stationary system that consists of multiple emitters, usually mounted on civilian infrastructure, such as cellular phone
towers. The Pole-21’s emitters are designed to impede unmanned aircraft, cruise missiles, and other high-precision weapons by jamming global
navigation systems such as GPS, GLONASS, and BeiDou. The Pole-21’s dispersed layout allows GPS jamming over hundreds, or even thousands
of square kilometers, depending upon configuration. This dispersed configuration not only provides resiliency from kinetic targeting, but also is
valuable for disrupting UAV operations.
The accompanying excerpted article from Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, a weekly military newspaper published by Nezavisimaya
Gazeta, which is a large-circulation daily centrist newspaper that is occasionally critical of the Russian government, explains that most UAV
software is configured to have UAVs fly away from areas where GPS jamming interferes with the UAV’s GPS reception so the UAV may again
acquire a GPS signal and ascertain its position. The Pole-21 is particularly effective against loitering munition-type UAVs employed in the
recent Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict because, once turned on, it jams a large area, possibly preventing the UAV from gaining a GPS signal and
eventually crashing.
The accompanying excerpted article from Yezhenedelnik Zvezda, a Russian website with geopolitical and Russian military news that is part of
the Zvezda media group owned by the Russian Ministry of Defense, explains that the Russian strategy for defeating UAVs does not just include the
Pole-21, and other electronic warfare systems, but is instead a combined effort that involves a network of electronic warfare, signals intelligence,
air defense, and nuclear, chemical, and biological defense (particulate smoke), systems. End OE Watch Commentary (Bartles)

“The Pole-21 simultaneously incorporates means of electronic

reconnaissance and electronic suppression of satellite navigation
systems…The system’s capabilities make it possible to prevent the
use of many types of high-precision weapons, including foreignmade unmanned vehicles. Moreover, it not only can suppress satellite
navigation system signals, but also cause geolocation errors. This is a
territorially-distributed system that can increase its capabilities and cover
significant sections of terrain. The system is designed to be used in close
interaction with air defense and missile defense systems.”

OE Watch | March 2021

16

EURASIA
Continued: Russia’s ‘Pole-21’ Electronic Warfare System’s
Role in Defeating UAVs
Source: Anton Lavrov and Roman Krezul, “Русское «Поле»: комплекс защитит Сибирь и Урал от дронов и ракет (The ‘Pole’ system
will protect Siberia and Urals against UAVs and missiles),” Izvestiya (pro-Kremlin daily newspaper), 1 February 2021. https://iz.ru/1118768/
anton-lavrov-roman-kretcul/russkoe-pole-kompleks-zashchitit-sibir-i-ural-ot-dronov-i-raket
…This year, a grouping of Pole-21 electronic suppression systems will be deployed in the Urals and Siberia, sources in the Defense Ministry
told Izvestiya. Last year, Lieutenant General Yuriy Lastochkin, chief of the Electronic Warfare (EW) Troops, explained that modern systems
make it possible to disrupt the precision navigation systems of guided weapon carriers and reduce the probability of strikes against our
country’s critically important industrial and defense infrastructure facilities. The Pole-21 belongs precisely to this type of armament.
Yet, unlike conventional EW systems, this one is built on the distributive principle. It uses not one or several units, but up to 100 jamming
transmitters that are deployed at great distances from each other. Each of them can be controlled, activated, and switched off remotely when
necessary. This makes it possible to cover a vast area of hundreds of square kilometers with dense jamming.
The performance and technical specifications of the Pole-21 system are not being disclosed. But, according to open publications, the
export version of the station suppresses all three main foreign satellite navigation systems: the American Navstar (better known by the GPS
designation), the European Galileo, and China’s BeiDou. The jamming area of a single system may reach 150 by 150 km. One station alone
is sufficient to suppress conventional GPS receivers at a distance of up to 25 kilometers. Nowadays, such receivers are used not only on
smartphones, but also in commercial and military UAVs, as well as in high-precision weapons.
“The Pole-21 simultaneously incorporates means of electronic reconnaissance and electronic suppression of satellite navigation systems,”
military expert Viktor Murakhovskiy told Izvestiya. “The system’s capabilities make it possible to prevent the use of many types of highprecision weapons, including foreign-made unmanned vehicles. Moreover, it not only can suppress satellite navigation system signals, but
also cause geolocation errors. This is a territorially-distributed system that can increase its capabilities and cover significant sections of
terrain. The system is designed to be used in close interaction with air defense and missile defense systems.”…
The first series-produced model of the Pole-21 was accepted into service in 2016. The Defense Ministry reports that such systems have
already been sent to several EW units in the Eastern Military District (VVO) and the 201st Russian Military Base located in Tajikistan. The
press service of the defense department reported the arrival in the VVO of the already modernized Pole-21M model last year, but did not
disclose details of the changes made to it…

“The uniqueness of the Pole-21 system lies in its configuration. As it has

already been said above, it employs several dozen relatively small lowpower jamming transmitters instead of several items with high-power
signal strength. Therefore, the Pole covers hundreds of kilometers at once.
Also, thanks to the advanced command and control system, the “Product
21” operators can analyze the situation and opt to use only a certain group
of the transmitters, rather than all of them at once. This approach helps
to avoid unmasking the Pole’s entire operational range. At the same time,
the UAV will no longer be able to fly several kilometers back and try to
reconnect with its satellite navigation systems…”

OE Watch | March 2021

17

EURASIA
Continued: Russia’s ‘Pole-21’ Electronic Warfare System’s
Role in Defeating UAVs
Source: Alexey Ramm, “Электронное «Поле» против дронов-убийц (Electronic ‘Pole’ Against Kamikaze-UAVs),” Nezavisimoye
Voyennoye Obozreniye Online (weekly military newspaper published by Nezavisimaya Gazeta a daily centrist newspaper that is occasionally
critical of the Russian government), 4 December 2020. https://nvo.ng.ru/nvo/2020-12-04/1_1120_karabakh.html
…Until recently, the Pole-21 was one of the most closely guarded electronic warfare systems in the Russian Armed Forces. The first
information about the Pole appeared in the fall of 2016. At the present time, the “Product 21” is already entering the inventory en masse.
There are several dozen compact transmitters in the Pole-21 composition. They are installed on high stationary facilities, such as cellular
communication towers. The Pole’s mission is to combat satellite navigation systems. One such system can shut down an area of 150 by 150
km. As the Russian Defense Ministry’s information reports indicate, “the Pole-21 is designed to protect strategically important facilities from
cruise missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, and guided aerial bombs.”…
Satellite navigation systems’ electronic jamming assets have long been present in the arsenal of the Russian Armed Forces. Their
development began back in the early 2000s. And the first test of such EW assets took place in the course of the Zapad-2009 exercises. The
R-330Zh Zhitel, is one of the most renowned Russian “anti-GPS” systems. The operational principle of satellite navigation suppression
systems is quite simple.
The transmission of the simplest signal from the satellite to the transmitter is what is laid in the basis of the GPS, GLONASS, Beidu, and
other systems. Therefore, a slightest deviation from the set frequency, even for milliseconds, will lead to the loss of precision. The signal
transmission is conducted in a rather narrow range, according to open data -- in 1575.42 MHz [L1 Band] and 1227.60 MHz [L2 Band].
Therefore, the operation of modern jammers is aimed precisely at blocking it. With a sufficiently powerful noise disturbance, it is not too big
of a challenge to suppress this range. However, modern unmanned aerial vehicles have learned to circumvent these systems. The EW systems
need to emit a very powerful signal. But its operational range is relatively small. Therefore, having lost contact with satellite navigation
systems, the UAV flies back for several kilometers. And as such, it exits the operational range of EW stations and restores the navigation
system’s operation.
The uniqueness of the Pole-21 system lies in its configuration. As it has already been said above, it employs several dozen relatively small
low-power jamming transmitters instead of several items with high-power signal strength. Therefore, the Pole covers hundreds of kilometers
at once. Also, thanks to the advanced command and control system, the “Product 21” operators can analyze the situation and opt to use only
a certain group of the transmitters, rather than all of them at once. This approach helps to avoid unmasking the Pole’s entire operational
range. At the same time, the UAV will no longer be able to fly several kilometers back and try to reconnect with its satellite navigation
systems…The main problem of the Pole-21 is its lack of mobility. This, in fact, is a stationary system. It is an optimal asset for protecting
military bases, strategic missile positions, and important industrial and military facilities. Small-sized transmitters must be installed,
mounted, and plugged in. And this takes quite a long time. Therefore, in the Russian Armed Forces, the Pole-21 operates in conjunction with
the new-generation Silok EW mobile system.

“A new way of protecting ground sites against hostile UAVs was

practiced during an exercise in the Central Military District. Air defense
subunits trained for the first time to engage UAVs in concert with
electronic warfare, signals intercept, and aerosol countermeasures teams.
More than 500 personnel and about 50 items of military equipment were
involved. Taking part in this integrated air defense exercise were the
crews of Pole-21, Zhitel, and Svet-KU electronic warfare and jamming
stations, TDA-3 thermal smoke generators, Podlet-K1 and Niobiy radar
stations, and Tor-M1 and Pantsir-S SAM system vehicles.”

OE Watch | March 2021

18

EURASIA
Continued: Russia’s ‘Pole-21’ Electronic Warfare System’s
Role in Defeating UAVs
Source: Aleksandr Grigoryev, “«Великая русская стена»: беспилотники утыкаются в завесу из огня и импульсов (‘The Great Wall
of Russia’: UAVs Encounter a Shroud of Fire and Pulses),” Yezhenedelnik Zvezda Online (Russian website with geopolitical and Russian
military news, part of the Zvezda media group owned by the Russian Ministry of Defense), 13 January 2021. https://zvezdaweekly.ru/
news/20211111126-9nttJ.html
From the first days of the incoming year of 2021, Russia’s forces have been busy assimilating the latest weaponry and equipment and
combining that with applying new methods of warfare. It is a fact of the times that in the very near future the course and the outcome of
modern-day warfare will be largely determined by unmanned aviation. But to every force there is a counter, and all of Russia’s military
districts are now practicing ways of protecting forces and ground infrastructure against enemy unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). At the
same time they are refining techniques for using their own UAVs during combat training, and increasing the flying hours of their metallic
reconnaissance scouts.
A new way of protecting ground sites against hostile UAVs was practiced during an exercise in the Central Military District. Air defense
subunits trained for the first time to engage UAVs in concert with electronic warfare, signals intercept, and aerosol countermeasures teams.
More than 500 personnel and about 50 items of military equipment were involved. Taking part in this integrated air defense exercise were
the crews of Pole-21, Zhitel, and Svet-KU electronic warfare and jamming stations, TDA-3 thermal smoke generators, Podlet-K1 and Niobiy
radar stations, and Tor-M1 and Pantsir-S SAM system vehicles. Takhion and Orlan-10 UAVs flying at low and extreme low altitudes acted as
the enemy in the air
Three tactical episodes were played out during the hands-on practice at a training ground in Chelyabinskaya Oblast. First, the signal
intercept crews detected the control frequencies of UAVs being made ready for takeoff, and transmitted this data to a command post. The
electronic warfare specialists then jammed the UAVs’ communication and navigation channels, thereby preventing them from taking to the
air.
In the second episode aerosol countermeasures teams concealed and protected the location and air defenses in the visual and infrared
spectrums, using the thermal smoke generating capabilities of a TDA-3 vehicle. In the concluding phase of the exercise drones were detected
and hypothetically destroyed by the crews of the Tor-M1 and Pantsir-S SAM systems. Every last drone was “shot down” with electronic
[simulated] launches at altitudes from 350 to 3,000 meters at ranges of up to 12 kilometers.
“Russia is getting better at taking down enemy UAVs. That could have serious implications for the United States as it makes more use of
unmanned aircraft ... The proliferation of jammers and Russia’s prowess in using them could threaten the American military’s fleet of UAVs.
US UAVs are becoming more autonomous. But they will always need some kind of radio link in order to transmit data. That’s one weakness
Russia exploits.”

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | March 2021

19

EURASIA
Russian UAV Organization and Developments
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying excerpted article from
Krasnaya Zvezda, the official newspaper of the Russian Ministry of
Defense, features an interview with Denis Fedutinov, the editor-in-chief of
Unmanned Aviation magazine. Fedutinov discusses the changing character
of warfare, UAV use in the Russian Armed Forces, and mentions that
Russia is developing strike UAVs, and prototypes have been field tested in
Syria. The accompanying excerpted article from Nezavisimoye Voyennoye
Obozreniye, a weekly military newspaper published by Nezavisimaya
Gazeta a large-circulation daily centrist newspaper that is occasionally
critical of the Russian government, explains how UAVs are organized in
the various branches of service that comprise the Russian Armed Forces.
Of particular interest, Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye states that
Screen shot from defense manufactures promotional film of Lancet loitering
the UAV company in a combined-arms brigade or division consists of two
munition UAV.
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9ftPRP6stc
platoons. The first is the short-range platoon, equipped with Orlan-10
and/or Takhion-4 UAVs. The second platoon is a close-range [ближнего действия] platoon, equipped with Granat-1, 2, 3, and 4, Zastava,
Takhion, and/or Eleron UAVs. The accompanying excerpted article from Izvestiya, a pro-Kremlin daily newspaper, states that although Russia
has tested the Lancet loitering munition UAV, or ‘kamikaze UAV’ as usually referred in the Russian mass media, in Syria; and strike UAVs are
in development, Russia is having production difficulties due to a lack of suitable domestically produced motors and engines. End OE Watch
Commentary (Bartles)

“[Strike UAVs] such as “Altius”, “Orion”, “Forpost”, and others are being

developed in Russia. A portion of them have already completed certain phases
of tests, which have confirmed the embedded characteristics. What is more,
some of the previously mentioned UAVs were successfully employed in the
operations of the Russian Armed Forces contingent on the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic…”
- Denis Fedutinov, Editor-in-Chief of “Unmanned Aviation” Magazine

Lancet loitering munition UAV.

Source: Vitaly Kuzmin, https://photos.smugmug.com/Military/ARMY-2019-Exhibition-pavilions/i-HwGLLZC/0/3a7de479/X2/Army2019Pavilions-071-X2.jpg, Attribution: CC BY 4.0

OE Watch | March 2021

20

EURASIA
Continued: Russian UAV Organization and Developments
Source: Alexander Tikhonov, “Беспилотники набирают высоту. И вес (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Are Gaining Altitude. And Weight),”
Krasnaya Zvezda Online (official newspaper of the Russian Ministry of Defense), 12 February 2021. http://redstar.ru/bespilotniki-nabirayutvysotu-i-ves/
Deliveries of complexes with reconnaissance-strike UAVs to the Russian Armed Forces - are a new step in the development of domestic
unmanned aviation. The fragmentary employment of complexes with unmanned aerial vehicles is receding into the past. Already today
UAVs, besides reconnaissance and surveillance in real time, are accomplishing EW missions and are capable of employing various aircraft
weapons. There is a reason why the RF Ministry of Defense leadership is paying careful attention to the development of unmanned aviation
and deliveries of new complexes with UAVs to the troops (forces). Today our interlocutor is Denis Fedutinov - a leading Russian expert in the
unmanned aerial vehicle sphere and the Editor-in-Chief of “Unmanned Aviation” Magazine. Our conversation is about the present and near
future of a number of domestic and foreign complexes with unmanned aerial vehicles…
Recent military conflicts are characterized by the increasingly frequent employment of unmanned aerial vehicles. They have already
become an integral element of combat operations. Denis Vyacheslavovich, list the missions, which UAVs are accomplishing on the
battlefield, more precisely above it.
The role of unmanned aviation systems in the achievement of victory over the enemy is increasing at the present time. The product list of the
systems that are being used, and also their functional capabilities - they are supporting not only the conduct of reconnaissance, including
in real time, but also the guidance of precision-guided weapons, and the accomplishment of signals intelligence and electronic warfare
missions…The use of unmanned aerial vehicle complexes in conjunction with traditional weapon systems and military equipment that are
controlled by man increases the troops’ combat capabilities and simultaneously reduces personnel losses. The listed facts determine the high
interest, which is being displayed by the armed forces of many of the world’s countries, to equip them with similar equipment. There is reason
to believe that the trend will be maintained in the future and unmanned aircraft will occupy a more substantial percentage among the total
amount of weapons and equipment that are being employed.
What is the state of affairs in domestic unmanned aviation?
Domestically-manufactured unmanned aerial vehicles have already long since become an integral part of any Russian Federation Armed
Forces combat training events and also of the accomplishment of combat and peacekeeping operations. Over the course of the last decade,
the Russian Military Department has systematically purchased in substantial numbers the UAVs that have been developed by Russian
companies to equip the Armed Forces with them. We are primarily talking about close and short operating range UAV systems. But, of course,
not only about them.
How do matters stand with the development of strike UAV systems?
Such complexes such as “Altius”, “Orion”, “Forpost”, and others are being developed in Russia. A portion of them have already completed
certain phases of tests, which have confirmed the embedded characteristics. What is more, some of the previously mentioned UAVs were
successfully employed in the operations of the Russian Armed Forces contingent on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic…

“The UAV company in a combined-arms brigade or division

consists of two platoons. The first is the short-range platoon,
armed with the Orlan-10 and Takhion-4. The second platoon
is a close-range platoon, and its main weapons are the
Granat-1, 2, 3, and 4, Zastava, Takhion, and Eleron.”
-Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy

OE Watch | March 2021

21

EURASIA
Continued: Russian UAV Organization and Developments
Source: Aleksey Ramm, “Куда летит беспилотная авиация (Where Unmanned Aviation is Flying: The Armed Forces are Increasingly
Interested in UAVs), Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye Online (weekly military newspaper, sometimes critical of Russian government
policies) 21 January 2021. https://nvo.ng.ru/armament/2021-01-21/1_1125_aviation.html
…All the branches of Russia’s armed forces currently have UAV aviation, the most numerous fleet being with the Ground Troops. The precise
number is not disclosed, but one can assume it is more than 1,500. The Orlan-10 family of UAVs, and also the Granat, Eleron, and Takhion,
form the backbone of the Ground Troops’ fleet. Motorized rifle and tank brigades and divisions have UAV companies as part of their standard
establishments, and similar subunits are being formed within the recently created separate reconnaissance brigades.
The UAV company in a combined-arms brigade or division consists of two platoons. The first is the short-range platoon, armed with the
Orlan-10 and Takhion-4. The second platoon is a close-range [ближнего действия] platoon, and its main weapons are the Granat-1, 2, 3,
and 4, Zastava, Takhion, and Eleron. Note that UAV companies in Airborne Troops divisions and brigades and also naval infantry units are
organized along similar lines. Although the UAV subunits are now generally established in the Airborne Troops, in the black beret brigades
and regiments the companies and platoons are still in the formative stage. For example, UAVs are already part of the 61st (Northern Fleet)
and 40th (Pacific Fleet, Kamchatka) Naval Infantry Brigades.
Artillery, engineer-sapper, missile, reconnaissance, and even railway brigades also have UAV subunits, which are primarily nearbyoperations separate platoons. For example, engineers use UAVs to survey mine fields and enemy fortifications, railway troops to assess the
condition of the track and also the extent of damage to bridges and other infrastructure. While missile brigades use UAVs to select suitable
positions for Iskander systems, and also to guard them. UAV subunits in artillery brigades have a fairly interesting organizational structure.
Apart from Orlan-10 platoons, they have teams with the latest Orlan-30 UAVs and also platoons for artillery UAV reconnaissance. The UAV
subunits in the newly formed Airborne Troops artillery brigade are expected to be organized in the same way…
Several UAV squadrons, both separate and as part of aviation regiments, have been formed within the Aerospace Forces. Until recently
the UAV units and subunits in the Aerospace Forces only operated the Forpost family of UAVs, but the fleet is now being augmented by the
Orlan-10. As announced in the fall of last year by the Defense Ministry, a separate aviation squadron has been formed to support operations
at the Plesetsk airfield and alongside its helicopters and aircraft are Orlan-10 UAVs. The UAVs’ mission is to ensure the security of rocket
launches from Plesetsk.
But it is the Navy that can boast of the most original way of organizing its UAV aviation, for only it has separate UAV regiments. These are
armed with the Forpost family of UAVs and the ubiquitous Orlan-10. Note that the latter operate not only from land. Orlan teams have been
based on board Russian Navy corvettes and frigates since 2018. The first naval UAV regiment was formed at the Northern Fleet and another
such unit is now expected to appear in Crimea (according to other reports, it is already in existence). Separate Forpost UAV squadrons
also make up part of several Naval Aviation regiments, in particular the 689th Fighter Regiment in Kaliningrad and the 318th (Crimea)
and 71st (Kamchatka) Composite Aviation Regiments. The Navy’s UAV regiments and squadrons work not only to benefit surface ships and
submarines. They also support hostilities by separate artillery and coastal missile and artillery brigades, and also coastal defense units…

“Our key problem is the lack of our own domestically produced

engines. Both electric engines, for small vehicles, as well as internal
combustion engines -- for the large ones. We need units with five to
150 horsepower capacity…There are experimental models, but none
in serial production. The second problem is the creation of small
munitions…As for the loitering munition UAVs, they are already being
used in Syria, although these are individual models. It is necessary to
determine which models exactly should be put into serial production.”
-Military Expert Viktor Murakhovskiy

OE Watch | March 2021

22

EURASIA
Continued: Russian UAV Organization and Developments
Source: Anton Lavrov, “Небесное дело: на какие беспилотники делает ставку Минобороны (Celestial Affair: The UAVs the Defense
Ministry Relies Upon), Izvestiya Online (pro-Kremlin daily newspaper) 13 December 2020. https://iz.ru/1098861/anton-lavrov/nebesnoedelo-na-kakie-bespilotniki-delaet-stavku-minoborony
…In three different conflicts this year, it was precisely the attack UAVs that played the key role, military expert Vladislav Shurygin told
Izvestiya. “With their help, Turkey managed to slow down the Syrian government’s offensive in Idlib,” the specialist reported. “In Libya, they
helped to reverse the situation and to push Haftar’s troops away from Tripoli. And just recently we observed their employment in the battles
for Nagorno-Karabakh. The experience of this conflict will be studied especially actively both abroad and in Russia, the expert believes. This
is the first-time kamikaze UAVs were employed in such numbers. They demonstrated their high effectiveness even against a standing army,
equipped not only with armored vehicles and artillery, but also with full-fledged low- and medium-range air defense systems,” Vladislav
Shurygin concluded.
This week, Sergey Chemezov, the head of Rostec, told the media that the Lancet light loitering kamikaze UAVs, created by the Kalashnikov
Concern, had been tested in Syria. The head of the state corporation also announced that the 200 kg Korsar medium-size UAV, which is
currently at the test phase, will have a strike function as well…”Our key problem is the lack of our own domestically produced engines. Both
electric engines, for small vehicles, as well as internal combustion engines -- for the large ones. We need units with five to 150 horsepower
capacity,” military expert Viktor Murakhovskiy told Izvestiya. “There are experimental models, but none in serial production. The second
problem is the creation of small munitions. For a long time, the matter was not attended as there was no demand for it, but a number of
enterprises have been working in this direction in recent years. Something has already been manufactured, and is being used in Syria.
However, in other areas, we still have to wait. As for the loitering munition UAVs, they are already being used in Syria, although these are
individual models. It is necessary to determine which models exactly should be put into serial production.
…We do not have a high altitude and lengthy flight duration strategic long-range unmanned aerial vehicle, the likes of the American Global
Hawk. So far, we do not know of any research and development projects in this area either. Maybe it is no longer considered to be important,
the expert said…”As far as the employment of tactical-class unmanned aerial vehicles and they availability in the troops are concerned,
things are in order,” Viktor Murakhovskiy believes. “There is a company of unmanned aerial vehicles in each of the Ground Troops brigades,
and they are also present in the naval infantry and coastal troops of the fleet. In Syria, we are able to deploy 50 to 70 UAVs in various regions
of the country simultaneously…
According to the Defense Ministry data, Russia has over 2,000 small reconnaissance UAVs in its inventory with advanced capabilities.
A family of complex and heavy unmanned aerial vehicles weighing over a ton is being developed. Yet the niche of medium-size vehicles,
weighing from 100 to 1,000 kg, remains nearly unoccupied. It is the very area, which offers the possibility to develop new attack and
multipurpose vehicles with great combat potential more quickly and cheaper…

THE MAD SCIENTIST LABORATORY BLOG
https://madsciblog.tradoc.army.mil/
Mad Scientist Laboratory engages
global innovators to report on the
Operational Environment (OE),
emergent disruptive technologies
and their convergent impacts, and
the changing character of warfare.

OE Watch | March 2021

23

EURASIA
Azerbaijan’s Post-War Exercise with Turkey
OE Watch Commentary: The Armed Forces of Azerbaijan have typically
carried out at least one joint military exercise a year with the Turkish armed
forces for the past few years. The accompanying excerpted articles report on
the most recent joint Azerbaijani-Turkish exercise and they provide a look at
how this security cooperation relationship continues to develop following the
2020 Nagorno Karabakh War.
The article from Kavkazskiy Uzel, an independent Russian-language
website with news from the Caucasus, reports on the Turkish government’s
announcement of “large-scale military exercises from 1-12 February in the
city of Kars (located near the border with Armenia).” The article notes how
“tankers, artilleryman, snipers and special forces personnel will work out
combat skills” and that “the goal of the exercise is strengthen cooperation
and improve coordination in joint operations as well as check the combat
readiness of soldiers, including operating in winter conditions.” The article An armored engineering vehicle (IMR) used by the Moscow Military District to
fight wildfires in the Moscow Region’s Lukhovitsky district.
includes a couple of interviews with military analysts who commented on the Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:RIAN_archive_734015_Wildfires_in_Moscow_Region%27s_Lukhovitsky_district.
jpg, Attribution: CC BY 3.0
exercise, included one who stated that it “is a message that Azerbaijan and
Turkey are ready to jointly respond to challenges and threats.” Another analyst stated “the conditions in which the exercises are taking place, as
well as the units involved, point to the development of offensive operations in mountainous terrain” and that “the location of the exercises is not
related to military-strategic goals of the two sides.” Instead, he says that “Kars could have been chosen because Azerbaijan is still preparing to
liberate cities.”
The article from Trend, a news agency based in Azerbaijan, also reports on the recent exercise and it notes that it involved “units from the
Separate Combined Arms Army” from Azerbaijan and that they “worked on tactical-special tasks of combat engineering support in difficult
conditions.” The article also points out how “a lot of attention was paid to the use of tank bridge layers, clearing engineering vehicles and
engineering ordnance.” Overall, the exercise provides another example of how the governments of Azerbaijan and Turkey continue to carry out
security cooperation and how Azerbaijani armed forces continue to prepare for operations in mountainous terrain and deal with engineering tasks
that come with it. End OE Watch Commentary (Stein)

“A lot of attention was paid to the use of tank bridge layers, clearing
engineering vehicles and engineering ordnance.”

Source: “Военные эксперты сочли учения Азербайджана и Турции связанными с Карабахом (Military experts have considered the
exercises of Azerbaijan and Turkey are connected with Karabakh),” Kavkazskiy Uzel (an independent Russian-language website with news
from the Caucasus), 29 January 2021. https://www.kavkaz-uzel.eu/articles/359201/
…Turkey announced large-scale military exercises from 1-12 February in the city of Kars (located near the border with Armenia)… Tankers,
artilleryman, snipers and special forces personnel will work out combat skills. The goal of the exercise is strengthen cooperation and improve
coordination in joint operations as well as check the combat readiness of soldiers, including operating in winter conditions…
For the Azerbaijani military, the importance of joint exercises with Turkey is connected to borrowing experience from Turkish forces,
explained Shahin Hajiyev, a military analyst…According to (Hajiyev), holding the exercises three months after the end of the fighting in
Nagorno Karabakh is a message that Azerbaijan and Turkey are ready to jointly respond to challenges and threats…
Previous large-scale joint exercises were carried out by Turkey and Azerbaijan in 2020: from July 1 to August 10. The exercises took place
in Baku, Nakhichevan, Ganja, Kurdamir and Yevlakh, with the ground and air forces of both countries involved…
The conditions in which the exercises are taking place, as well as the units involved, point to the development of offensive operations in
mountainous terrain, said military analyst Alexander Perendzhiyev…“The location of the exercises is not related to military-strategic goals of
the two sides, he added…“Kars could have been chosen because Azerbaijan is still preparing to liberate cities”…

OE Watch | March 2021

24

EURASIA
Continued: Azerbaijan’s Post-War Exercise with Turkey
Source: “Военные эксперты сочли учения Азербайджана и Турции связанными с Карабахом (Military experts have considered the
exercises of Azerbaijan and Turkey are connected with Karabakh),” Kavkazskiy Uzel (an independent Russian-language website with news
from the Caucasus), 29 January 2021. https://www.kavkaz-uzel.eu/articles/359201/
…Turkey announced large-scale military exercises from 1-12 February in the city of Kars (located near the border with Armenia)… Tankers,
artilleryman, snipers and special forces personnel will work out combat skills. The goal of the exercise is strengthen cooperation and improve
coordination in joint operations as well as check the combat readiness of soldiers, including operating in winter conditions…
For the Azerbaijani military, the importance of joint exercises with Turkey is connected to borrowing experience from Turkish forces,
explained Shahin Hajiyev, a military analyst…According to (Hajiyev), holding the exercises three months after the end of the fighting in
Nagorno Karabakh is a message that Azerbaijan and Turkey are ready to jointly respond to challenges and threats…
Previous large-scale joint exercises were carried out by Turkey and Azerbaijan in 2020: from July 1 to August 10. The exercises took place
in Baku, Nakhichevan, Ganja, Kurdamir and Yevlakh, with the ground and air forces of both countries involved…
The conditions in which the exercises are taking place, as well as the units involved, point to the development of offensive operations in
mountainous terrain, said military analyst Alexander Perendzhiyev…“The location of the exercises is not related to military-strategic goals of
the two sides, he added…“Kars could have been chosen because Azerbaijan is still preparing to liberate cities”…

Book Review: A Look Back and Forward at
Turkey’s “Strategic Depth” Foreign Policy Doctrine
Karen Kaya
February 2020
“Strategic Depth (Stratejik Derinlik)” is a Turkish book published
in 2001. This was a time when international relations theorists were
describing new frameworks of world order and security modalities
following the end of the Cold War and bi-polar world. Works such as
Francis Fukuyama’s “End of History” and Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of
Civilizations” were icons of this intellectual period. It was in this context
of a changing international system that Turkish International Relations
Professor Ahmet Davutoğlu (who later served as Foreign Minister
between 2009-2014 and Prime Minister between 2014-2016) attempted
to define Turkey’s position in his book “Strategic Depth.” From around
2002 to 2012, the foreign policy that Davutoğlu outlined in his book
was considered the doctrine and roadmap for Turkish foreign policy.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/309386

OE Watch | March 2021

25

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Concept of “Intelligentization”: Self-Teaching
Systems
OE Watch Commentary: China has been aggressively striving to become the leader in artificial intelligence (AI). According to the following
article published in Jiefangjun Bao, the official newspaper of China’s Central Military Commission, AI will usher in the era of “intelligentized
warfare.” The authors of the article offer some interesting ideas and analyses on what they believe intelligentized warfare means. First, they
compare it to today’s “informatized warfare.” While informatized warfare is network-centric and relies on an information connection of some
sort, intelligentized warfare is cognitive-centric and relies on calculation and intelligence. The authors argue that intelligentized warfare will
“exceed firepower, mechanical power, and information power.” At the same time, they are not saying that intelligentizatized warfare will replace
informatized warfare. Rather, the age of intelligentized warfare will combine mechanized, informatized, and intelligentized operations to pursue
military objectives.
The age of intelligentized warfare will
bring in unmanned, autonomous systems.
The authors outline three developmental
stages that they envision unmanned systems
going through. First, manned systems will
be primary, while unmanned systems will be
secondary. Second, reversing roles, manned
systems will be secondary and unmanned
systems will be primary. In the third stage,
man will make the rules, but actions will be
carried out autonomously.

Chart.

Source: Made by author, using information from the article.

The article also shows the importance China puts on developing capabilities in machine learning and deep learning. While the authors do
not mention this specifically, they allude to it by explaining that the biggest difference between intelligentized and informatized warfare is that
intelligentized weapons and equipment will improve themselves while in use. In other words, the more combat experience the systems acquire, the
more information they accumulate and therefore the more improvement will be seen in their functionality. “Deep learning” is a type of machine
learning that processes information through an artificial neural network, which is similar to the human brain. It learns through experience.
The authors explain that in the age of intelligentized warfare, the weapons or military equipment systems’ ability to program themselves will
determine their overall combat strength. Therefore, according to the authors, more focus needs to be put on developing their self-programming
capability, rather than focusing on designing and developing traditional weapons and equipment. Doing so, they say, will bring China into the age
of intelligentized warfare. End OE Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“In the future, “intelligence dominance” will become a new type of
dominance or power of control that has a huge strategic impact on
the overall warfare. Once we lose “intelligence dominance,” other
dominances will be quickly weakened.”

Source: Zhao Xiaokang and Zhang Wei, “智能化带来战争新变化 (Intelligentization Brings About New Transformation in Warfare),”
Jiefangjun Bao (the official newspaper of the People’s Republic of China’s Central Military Commission), 7 January 2021. http://military.
people.com.cn/n1/2021/0107/c1011-31992241.html
As the pace of military intelligentization accelerates, the world’s major military powers have started competing for “intelligence power” in the military field. In the
future, “intelligence dominance” will become a new type of dominance or power of control that has a huge strategic impact on the overall warfare; once we lose
“intelligence dominance,” other dominances will be quickly weakened.
…Informatized warfare is network-centric warfare; its core is “connection,” the leading force is information, and it seeks to gather energy with networks and
release energy with networks; it uses the system of systems for local, uses the network for discrete, and uses fast to control slow. Intelligentized warfare is cognitivecentric warfare; its core is “calculation,” the leading force is intelligence, and the weight that intelligence accounts for will exceed firepower, mechanical power, and
information power. What it pursues is to drive capabilities with intelligence and control capabilities with intelligence.
Unmanned (technology) is a concentrated manifestation of the integrated development of mechanization, informatization, and intelligentization. In the age of
intelligentization, the development of “unmanned” technology will undergo three stages: “manned as primary and unmanned as secondary,” “manned as secondary
and unmanned as primary,” and “rules with a man and actions without a man.”
…Meanwhile, the AI-based unmanned technology will gradually expand to other domains such as cyber attack and defense, electronic countermeasure, multisource
sensing, correlation proofing, person tracking, public opinion analysis, and infrastructure management and control.
… biggest difference between intelligentized weapons and equipment and other weapons and equipment lies in that while serving as weapons, they will also improve
themselves. With the accumulation of real combat experience, they will continue to learn and improve and integrate these advantages and methods for responding
to situations in a highly efficient manner so that they will perform even more outstandingly in warfare. The unique nature of intelligentization has resulted in the
core combat power of intelligentized warfare, mainly led by intelligentized weapons and intelligentized units, to possess very strong self-learning and self-growth
characteristics. The age of intelligentization must abandon the traditional weapons and equipment development model from requirements, design, and R&D to
application and maintenance and adopt the new iterative systems engineering model of the Information Age so that the intelligent weapons and intelligent units can
gradually grow in the process of uninterrupted iteration and complete the generation of “intelligent combat power.”

OE Watch | March 2021

26

INDO-PACIFIC
China’s Next Step in Modernization: Developing Effective
Integrated Joint Operations
OE Watch Commentary: The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) of China underwent a massive restructuring from the end of 2015 to 2020,
in part intended to develop the necessary structure to support informatized, integrated joint operations. Now that the restructuring is reportedly
complete, there has been much talk about joint operations and what should be done to ensure the PLA is capable of carrying out such operations.
The following article excerpts, published in Jiefangjun Bao, the official newspaper of the Central Military Commission, and Hong Kong-based
South China Morning Post (SCMP), address this topic. Both articles discuss the importance of integrated joint operations, current weaknesses in
the PLA, ways to overcome some of the weaknesses, and what is being done.
According to Jiefangjun Bao, even though the army has done a lot of work toward joint training for joint combat, there are still gaps and
weaknesses. For example, the army still lacks experienced, qualified, and knowledgeable army personnel. Also, basic doctrine is lacking. SCMP
points out that the different systems, such as intelligence systems, are not compatible. This has caused disruptions in military operations. In some
cases, units are still using old systems to train their combat forces. In a move to push forward, according to Jiefangjun Bao, Chinese President Xi
Jinping recently urged the PLA to begin “deepening joint training for joint combat, adhering to joint training to guide the training of services and
branches, and supporting joint training with the training of services and branches.” All the “nodes” need to be able to work together seamlessly
and personnel need to have a firm understanding of each of the other units.
SCMP explains that the PLA has already begun its training program by cross-training military officers. For example, army officers were
deployed to navy vessels. Air force officers were supporting PLA Strategic Rocket Force units. Improving the PLA’s ability to conduct joint
operations is seen as necessary for what the country views as its most likely combat scenarios: namely, according to SCMP, “a potential campaign
against Taiwan,” which “would aim to ‘kill with a single hit.’” The PLA improving its capabilities to conduct joint combat operations is viewed
as the best way to fight and win future battles. According to SCMP, possessing these capabilities also serves as an “effective deterrent.” End OE
Watch Commentary (Hurst)

“if joint operational capabilities are not superior enough, one will
be defeated in the system-of-systems confrontation.”
Source: “Liu Haitao, “联战联训，把联合作战能力提上来 (Joint Training for Joint Combat to Improve Joint Operational Capabilities),”
Jiefangjun Bao (the official newspaper of the Central Military Commission), 13 January 2021. http://www.81.cn/yw/2021-01/13/
content_9966907.htm
Joint Training for Joint Combat to Improve Joint Operational Capabilities
The mobilization order for start of training in 2021 that Chairman Xi issued to the entire army not long ago emphasizes “deepening joint training for
joint combat, adhering to joint training to guide the training of services and branches, and supporting joint training with the training of services and
branches.” This mobilization order once again highlights the great significance of system-of-systems troop training and joint training to fighting and
winning future wars.
Integrated joint operations will be the basic form of future warfare. On tomorrow’s battlefield, there will be fewer and fewer single-handedly
close-combat engagements, which will be replaced by system-vs-system and systems-vs-systems confrontations with features of informatization and
intelligentization.
…if joint operational capabilities are not superior enough, one will be defeated in the system-of-systems confrontation.
… To accelerate the realization of transforming and upgrading military training and to comprehensively enhance the level of training and the ability
to fight and win, we must adhere to system-of-systems troop training and seek combat power from joint training for joint combat. Our army’s future
operational patterns are integrated joint operations under the unified command of the joint operational command structure.
In recent years, our army has done a lot of work in joint training for joint combat, but there are still certain gaps and the approach of system-of-systems
training has not completely been formed. Some joint operations lack solid basic doctrine as well as the intellectual support of joint training for joint
combat. Some joint training is not often carried out, and when it is carried out, “the gong rings but the drum beat is not uniform;” Some have failed to
integrate new equipment and new-quality fighting force into the system-of-systems training, and the overall effectiveness of joint training is not strong
enough. There are also information system links that are not fully opened through, and node control is not flexible and highly efficient enough. To
solve these problems, there is no other way but to adhere to joint efforts as the key link, to develop the joint training system of systems with our army’s
characteristics, and to accelerate the enhancement of integrated joint operational capabilities.
…Only when artillery units communicate more with radar units, landing units understand more about the situation of naval vessel units, and UAV units
get more familiar with the characteristics of Army Aviation units can they fight the battle with joint efforts effectively.
The most effective means [to conduct] joint training for joint combat is to use the “enemy” for troop training by carrying out confrontation between
Red and Blue [Forces] and system-of-systems confrontation. …This requires us to build an excellent “Blue Force” of joint operational training, shift the
training to the integrated joint confrontation based on the network information system of systems, and truly contribute to the highly integrated battlefield
situation, command decision-making, and firepower strike system of the “Red Force” through confrontation, so as to train each operational platform and
system to become superior and accelerate the enhancement of the joint operational capabilities.

OE Watch | March 2021

27

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: China’s Next Step in Modernization: Develop
Effective Integrated Joint Operations
Source: Liu Zhen, “China’s Military ‘Prepares for War’ With Joint Operations, Cross Training,” South China Morning Post (Hong Kongbased news outlet owned by Alibaba), January 24, 2021. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3118969/chinas-militaryprepares-war-joint-operations-cross-training
A five-year overhaul of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which ended last year, saw the restructuring of the command chain to make cross-service
combat a basic approach for future operations.
To help develop commanders and staff for joint operations, the PLA began its 2021 training programme by deploying army officers on naval vessels and
seconding air force officers to the army’s rocket units, PLA Daily reported on Tuesday.
Yue Gang, a retired PLA senior colonel said improving joint operation capabilities was necessary for the most likely combat scenarios for the Chinese
military, such as a potential campaign against Taiwan that would aim to “kill with a single hit”, he said.
“Even if war never breaks out, the PLA has to be trained to that level, so it can serve as an effective deterrent,” he said.
Observers say the PLA’s joint operation capabilities were ripe for improvement.
In an exercise several years ago, a joint army-navy landing force failed to complete a mission after suffering an information delay caused by the two
branches using different intelligence distribution systems, according to South Sea Fleet Captain Colonel Yang Yang.

VIRTUAL WAR: THE QATAR-UAE BATTLE OF NARRATIVES
Lucas Winter
May 2020
For much of the past decade, Qatar and the UAE have been engaged
in a battle of narratives. Their ongoing dispute dates to 2011 and is
rooted in foreign policy and ideological disagreements. Following a
hack of the Qatari News Agency in 2017, the nature of Qatari-Emirati
competition shifted from being primarily the purview of government
officials, spokespeople, journalists, analysts and authors, to one where
coders, influencers, trolls and cybersecurity experts played a vital role.
Since then, both countries have worked to increase their capabilities
in the cyber and informational domains. Their relationship in these
domains has evolved into one of strategic competition. This paper looks
at how these dynamics may affect the regional operational environment,
with a particular focus on the cyber and informational domains.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/329799

OE Watch | March 2021

28

INDO-PACIFIC
President Xi issues 2021 Training Mobilization Order
OE Watch Commentary: At the beginning of January 2021, President Xi as chairman of China’s Central Military Commission (CMC) signed
a training mobilization order for the armed forces for the new year. According to the People’s Liberation Army Daily, the order includes the
People’s Armed Police Force, the paramilitary force now under CMC command. The order reiterates training issues and problems addressed in
a November 2020 CMC Military Training Conference focused on strengthening military training. The training conference proposed numerous
solutions to the People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA) training problems. While President Xi assessed that the PLA had made some progress with
military training and education reforms in the past two decades, many training and education problems persist, inhibiting combat capabilities and
the ambitious military modernization plan. Conference proposals included high-level direction to impose training uniformity, improved training
support for multi-region and long-distance training, upgrading regional training bases, training for a unit’s operational mission, integrating high
tech to improve training, and combining real and simulation training.
The training mobilization order establishes this year’s training objectives addressing problem areas discussed in the training conference. Training
will continue to stress actual combat, employing realistic combat conditions. This ongoing reform addresses the PLA’s lack of recent combat
experience and prepares the PLA to win conflicts. Actual combat training includes confrontation training and training towards unit operational
missions.
Training this year will focus on joint operations training, including joint command and joint specialized training to improve the development
of integrated joint operations capabilities. The PLA intends to strengthen the use of science and technology in training, including training with
new equipment. This includes simulation, as well as network and electromagnetic confrontation. Training will also support the system of systems
operations, which represents the integration of the command information system with forces and equipment that will provide the foundation of an
integrated joint operations capability. Similarly, training will support integration of operational system of systems, which is a modular integrated
task force with an ability to reconfigure to meet changing operational requirements. The PLA usually refers to joint or service operational system
of systems as campaign-level formations or tactical-level formations.
The PLA also intends to enhance training regulations, promote training innovation, strengthen training supervision and planning, and improve
training evaluations. Another major reform is trying to integrate military academies with unit training to create a synergistic effect to improve
problems in both military education and training. End OE Watch Commentary (McCauley)

“The commanders and troops of the whole army should resolutely
implement the decision-making instructions of the Party Central
Committee and the Central Military Commission.... and welcome
the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of
China with outstanding achievements.”

Source: “Xi Jinping signs the Central Military Commission Order No. 1 of 2021 Issues a training mobilization order to the whole army (习近平签署中央军委2021年1号命令 - 向全军发布开训动员令),” People’s
Liberation Army Daily (official PLA newspaper), January 5, 2021. http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2021-01/05/content_279778.htm
Beijing, January 4th. Today, Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, President of the
State, and Chairman of the Central Military Commission signed the Central Military Commission Order No. 1 of 2021, issuing a training and
mobilization order to the entire army. The full text is as follows:
In 2021, the entire military must adhere to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era,
implement Xi Jinping’s Thought on Strengthening the Army, implement the military strategy of the new era, implement the spirit of the Central
Military Commission’s Military Training Conference, and strengthen the party’s leadership over military training. Prepare for war, deepen
the transformation of military training, build a new military training system, and comprehensively improve the level of combat training and
the ability to win.

OE Watch | March 2021

29

INDO-PACIFIC
Vietnamese Advisor Recalls Battle of the Paracel Islands
with China
OE Watch Commentary: China secured control of the Paracel Islands on
19 January 1974 when the then South Vietnamese government was unable
to defend the island from Chinese attack. Vietnam’s loss in the Battle of the
Paracel Islands still resonates today among Vietnamese. The excerpted 19
January article in thannhien.vn, a Vietnamese-language newspaper with a
focus on social issues, reflects how memories of that battle are rekindled on
the anniversary of that battle.
The article was written by Trần Văn Thọ, a Tokyo-based former
Vietnamese economic advisor to the Japanese government. Thọ was a 25year old student in Japan when the 1974 battle occurred. In the article,
he discussed how China carefully curates narratives about wars it has
conducted in its borderlands, including the Battle of the Paracel Islands,
which Vietnamese call Hoang Sa. Thọ also noted a Japanese professor
close to him had also visited China’s Hainan Island and told Thọ about
China’s memorial for the 1974 battle, which referred to Chinese soldiers as
hoang-sa.
Source: Vietnamese Government, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map-hoang-sa.png, Attribution: CC x 2.0
martyrs and heroes and, according to Thọ, included numerous fabrications
about Chinese self-defense in the battle. Thọ nevertheless recognized that although it was at Vietnam’s expense, China was succeeding in passing
on a legacy of its battle achievements to future generations in China.
Throughout much of the article, Thọ analyzes China’s ways of memorializing the Battle of the Paracel Islands and notes the importance of
Vietnam doing the same—creating its own narratives. This is especially important in regards to the forty-seventh anniversary of South Vietnam’s
inability to withstand China’s assault on the Paracel Islands—China’s first stake in the South China Sea islands. Thọ laments that Vietnam is not
doing enough to clarify the true history from Vietnam’s perspective to justify its sovereignty over the Paracel Islands. Thọ’s article, therefore,
highlights how in Southeast Asia history is among the most important ways that countries inspire their citizens to claim sovereignty in the South
China Sea and to justify their claims over territory legally and through popular opinion. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The invader not only distorted the truth, but also desired
to forever pass on the story of the ‘achievements’ of the
invasion through memorials.”

Source: “47 năm ngày Trung Quốc cưỡng chiếm Hoàng Sa: Kẻ xâm lược nguỵ tạo ký ức như thế nào? (47 Years Since China Conquered
Hoang Sa: How is the Invasion Remembered?).” thanhnien.vn (Vietnamese language newspaper), 19 January 2021, https://thanhnien.vn/
thoi-su/47-nam-ngay-trung-quoc-cuong-chiem-hoang-sa-ke-xam-luoc-nguy-tao-ky-uc-nhu-the-nao-1331507.html?utm_source=coccoc&utm_
medium=ccnews
On this day 47 years ago our Hoang Sa was suddenly captured by China through force. Few people know well what China did then. We all
know that the invasion of our territory by China was propagated to its people as a self-defense war. Having the opportunity to read what they
disseminate and propagate about the Hoang Sa event, I cannot help but be surprised at the very blatant fabrication.
In 2012, I held a Vietnam-China intellectual dialogue in Tokyo and invited Professor Ishii to speak. He visited the Vietnam-China border and
wrote a chapter about the war in 1979. Particularly regarding the Hoang Sa incident, he visited Hainan province because he heard China
built a memorial area for martyrs in the battle.
The invader not only distorted the truth, but also desired to forever pass on the story of the ‘achievements’ of the invasion through
memorials. Has our efforts to clarify history and justify sovereignty been enough?

OE Watch | March 2021

30

INDO-PACIFIC
Defense Expenditures in India
OE Watch Commentary: The Indian government’s defense expenditures have
notably increased over the past few years, including the Indian armed forces making
a number of fast-track acquisitions of weapons and equipment in response to the
2020 border clashes with China. The accompanying excerpted articles report on
recent developments with defense expenditures and acquisitions; and they show how
this continues to take shape.
The article from The Wire, an independent English-language news website, looks
at defense spending issues in India. The author states that “India’s military faces
a massive financial predicament in the fiscal year 2021-22 as it remains locked in a
costly faceoff with China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) along the Line of Actual
Control (LAC) in eastern Ladakh.” In addition, “all three services are believed to
Indian Ministry of Defence.
have already executed emergency purchases of over $2 billion since June 2020 to Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Indian_Ministry_of_Defence-1.jpg, Attribution: Public Domain
plug enduring equipment and ammunition shortages, adversely upsetting budgetary calculations.” The author goes on to note how the “military’s
financial demands come at a time when India is deep in recession, following the serious financial downturn due to the COVID-19 pandemic” and
that the issue goes back a couple of years when the then defense minister “declared in July 2018 that there was neither a shortage of funds nor of
ammunition.” He mentions that this statement “was in direct contrast to the Defence Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence (SCoD) that
had publicly affirmed a shortage of funds for the military.”
The article from Force, a defense and security news website from India, reports on a recent agreement by the Indian government to acquire
a new unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). The article mentions that “the Indian Army has awarded an approximately $20 million contract for
undisclosed quantities of a high-altitude variant of ideaForge’s SWITCH UAV which will be delivered over a period of 1 year” and that this was a
“fast-track procurement.” It goes on to note that the UAV “can be deployed at high altitude and harsh environments for day and night surveillance”
and that “it is man-portable and has the highest time on target compared to any other UAV in its class.” At $20 million, this acquisition is
cheaper and scheduled to be delivered faster than some of the purchases made in the past year in response to the border clashes with China (see:
“The Indian Army’s Shopping List,” OE Watch, September 2020). While it remains to be seen how the Indian economy will continue to impact
defense expenditures for the coming year, the contract for the surveillance UAV provides an example of continuing acquisitions. End OE Watch
Commentary (Stein)

“This Fixed Wing VTOL (Vertical Take-off and Landing) UAV can be deployed
at high altitude and harsh environments for day and night surveillance in
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) missions”

Source: “Amit Cowshish, “India’s 2021-22 Defence Budget Needs Honest Financial Reckoning, Not Empty Rhetoric,” The Wire (independent
English-language news website), 9 January 2021. https://thewire.in/security/india-defence-budget-military-spending-honest-recokoning
India’s military faces a massive financial predicament in the fiscal year 2021-22, as it remains locked in a costly faceoff with China’s People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in eastern Ladakh.
To meet this forbidding challenge, that shows no sign of abating, all three services are believed to have already executed emergency
purchases of over $2 billion since June 2020 to plug enduring equipment and ammunition shortages, adversely upsetting budgetary
calculations…
The military’s financial demands come at a time when India is deep in recession, following the serious financial downturn due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Though some green shoots are visible in the economy, these are unlikely to shore up government revenues in the
coming fiscal in any substantial measure…
Totally disregarding reality, then defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman had unbelievingly declared in July 2018 that there was neither a
shortage of funds nor of ammunition, when there was a paucity of both. The minister’s optimism, in fact, was in direct contrast to the Defence
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence (SCoD) that had publicly affirmed a shortage of funds for the military…
Source: “Indian Army Signs Contract with ideaForge to procure SWITCH UAV,” Force (defense and security news website from India), 14
January 2021. http://forceindia.net/indian-army-signs-contract-ideaforge-procure-switch-uav/
The Indian Army has awarded an approximately $20 million contract for undisclosed quantities of a high-altitude variant of ideaForge’s
SWITCH UAV which will be delivered over a period of 1 year.
ideaForge won this contract after it emerged as the only vendor that qualified the operational requirements in an evaluation done in realworld conditions, for a fast-track procurement…
OE Watch | March 2021

31

INDO-PACIFIC
Indonesia Female Suicide Bomber Details InterGenerational Radicalization
OE Watch Commentary: Female suicide bombings have become increasingly rare among jihadist groups in recent years. Among the only
groups consistently employing them is Boko Haram, but extremely little is known about its female suicide bombers’ profiles and whether or not
they self-detonate or are arrested beforehand, according to scholarly research on the subject by West Point’s Combatting Terrorism Center. In
contrast, the excerpted 15 January article in Indonesian-language for benarnews.org, which is affiliated with Radio Free Asia and covers sensitive
issues, detailed the radicalization of an Indonesian female suicide bomber.
According to the article, this teenage female suicide bomber, Rezky Fantasya Rullie, came from a family of jihadists. Her parents both
committed suicide bombings at a church in Jolo, Philippines during Sunday mass in January 2019, which killed 23 people. That bombing was
recently discussed in a 27 January article for the Filipino website rappler.com, which covers terrorism in the country. Following the deaths of her
parents, Rullie began living with a bomb-maker, whose bomb killed 15 people at another Jolo church in August 2020. That incident was described
in the mainstream Indonesian publication, jakartapost.com. However, the excerpted article states that the bomb-maker was also the nephew of
Hatib Hajan Sawadjaan, who himself was an Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) commander in the Philippines as well as senior Abu Sayyaf
leader. Consistent with this, the article noted Rullie herself was captured by the Philippines’ security forces alongside two Filipino women who
had groomed her for a suicide bombing operation and were married to Abu Sayyaf members.
The article also discusses how Indonesian Consul General in the Philippines, Dicky Fabrian, was invited by commander of the Western Mindanao
Command (Wesmincom), Lt. Gen. Corleto Vinluan, to meet Rullie and confirm she was Indonesian. Rullie explained how she came to live in
the mountainous areas near Jolo and how she was forcibly married to a suicide bomber. The article, therefore, indicated Rullie’s radicalization
was largely involuntary and the product of the environment into which her parents brought her. It also stated that the Philippines, Malaysia, and
Indonesia resolved to conduct patrols in their border regions, especially maritime areas, to prevent terrorists from crossing from one country to
another, as occurred with Rullie and her parents. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“Local officials said that Rullie herself was groomed by them
to become a suicide bomber.”

Source: “Terduga Pelaku Bom Asal Indonesia Mengaku Dipaksa Orangtua Bergabung ISIS (Alleged Indonesian Bomber Claims Parents
Forced Her to Join ISIS),” benarnews.org (Affiliated with Radio Free Asia), 15 January 2021. https://www.benarnews.org/indonesian/berita/
pembom-asal-indonesia-mengaku-dipaksa-ortu-gabung-isis-01152021211708.html#:~:text=Video-,Terduga%20Pelaku%20Bom%20Asal%20
Indonesia%20Mengaku%20Dipaksa%20Orangtua%20Bergabung%20ISIS,diri%20untuk%20misi%20bunuh%20diri.&text=Polisi%20
memeriksa%20lokasi%20ledakan%20bom,Filipina%20selatan%2C%2027%20Januari%202019
Pearson, Elizabeth. “Wilayat Shahidat: Boko Haram, the Islamic State, and the Question of the Female Suicide Bomber.” In Boko Haram
Beyond the Headlines: Analyses of Africa’s Enduring Insurgency, edited by Jacob Zenn. West Point, NY: Combating Terrorism Center, 2018

Source: “At least 23 dead in Jolo Cathedral bombing,” rappler.com (Indonesian website covering terrorism in the country), 27 January 2021.
https://www.rappler.com/nation/jolo-sulu-cathedral-bombing-january-27-2019

OE Watch | March 2021

32

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: Indonesia Female Suicide Bomber Details
Inter-Generational Radicalization
Source: “Twin bombings kill 15, wound scores in Philippine south.” jakartapost.com (mainstream Indonesian news), 24 August 2020. https://
www.thejakartapost.com/seasia/2020/08/24/twin-bombings-kill-15-wound-scores-in-philippine-south.html
A young Indonesian woman who was arrested in the southern Philippines while preparing a suicide bomb mission claimed that her
parents forced her to join ISIS. Rezky Fantasya Rullie, who is thought to be in her teens or in her early 20s, was granted permission to meet
Indonesian Consul General Dicky Fabrian, said Lt. Gen. Corleto Vinluan, commander of the Western Mindanao Command, who was also
present at the meeting.
Rullie’s parents killed themselves in twin bomb attacks on a church on Jolo Island in the southern Philippines two years ago. Local officials
said that Rullie herself was groomed by them to become a suicide bomber. Last October, Philippine troops arrested Rullie with two Filipinos
who were suspected of preparing a suicide attack and who were married to members of the Abu Sayyaf, a pro-ISIS militant group based in
the southern Philippines.
The conversation between Fabrian and Rullie covered her personal life. Rullie is believed to have been under the guardianship of Mundi
Sawadjaan, a bomb maker who was behind another bomb attack near the same church that left 15 people dead in August, local officials said.
Mundi is the nephew of Hatib Hajan Sawadjaan, an ISIS commander in the Philippines and a senior Abu Sayyaf leader.
According to Vinluan, Indonesia’s consul general said that Jakarta had committed to deploying more assets to guard the common borders
between neighboring countries that were easily breached in the fight against terrorism. The Philippines and neighboring countries Indonesia
and Malaysia have been conducting joint patrols to secure their maritime borders from militants and piracy under a trilateral cooperation
agreement.

Aftermath of the Jolo Cathedral bombings.

Source: Albert Alcain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aftermath_of_the_Jolo_Cathedral_bombings.jpg, Attribution: CC x 2.0

OE Watch | March 2021

33

INDO-PACIFIC
A Young Singaporean Radical’s Disrupted Road to
Militancy
OE Watch Commentary: On 28 January, Singapore’s
reputed mainstream publication straitstimes.com, detailed the
radicalization process of a 16-year old Singaporean. According
to the article, the youth, who was a Christian of Indian descent,
was planning to attack Muslims with machetes at two mosques.
He was, however, detained prior to the plot under Singapore’s
Internal Security Act. The two mosques he planned to attack
were among the best known in Singapore. If the attack had
succeeded it might have had a significant impact.
The article refers to Singapore’s Internal Security Department,
which stated that the youth originally watched Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) videos. He then became enraged after
watching an ISIS video from Libya where ISIS beheaded
Ethiopian Christians. One year later, in 2019, he read Brentan
Tarrant’s manifesto and watched Tarrant’s live-streamed mass
Masjid Yusof Ishak.
Source:Ronggy, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Masjid_Yusof_Ishak.jpg, Attribution: CC x 2.0
shootings at two New Zealand mosques. Another year later,
he read about a Tunisian who stabbed worshippers at Notre Dame basilica in France. This convinced him of the need to defend Christians in
Singapore by killing Muslims, who he believed had higher fertility than Christians.
Once he began engaging in reconnaissance and online research about the two mosques he intended to target, he sought to purchase a gun and
went so far as to acquire a tactical vest that he adorned with symbols that Tarrant wore. However, the article notes Singapore’s strict gun control
measures meant he could only acquire knives, not guns, after which he began watching Youtube videos about slashing. Some time during
this preparation, and after he began drafting a manifesto, the Internal Security Department received intelligence tips about his activities and
preemptively arrested him. The article states that because he was considered an imminent security threat, he became the youngest individual to
have ever been detained on terrorism charges in Singapore.
The article’s presentation of the steps of this youth’s radicalization demonstrate several key trends. First, the youth was heavily radicalized on
the internet; was influenced by ISIS, albeit not to attack on behalf of ISIS but to attack Muslims whom he conflated with ISIS. Second, he sought
to become a “copycat” killer, with Tarrant as his main example. Third, he also does not appear to have had a close relationship with his parents,
which, according to a separate 31 January article for Singapore-based Channel News Asia, is a contributing factor to youth extremism. Although
the article does not state how the Internal Security Department discovered the youth’s preparations, there was a significant online and offline trail
that he left behind. This reflects how lone attackers may be more difficult to detect than larger cells, but they often make errors that can enable
security forces to detect them, as occurred in this case. End OE Watch Commentary (Zenn)

“The secondary student was found to have made detailed

plans and preparations to conduct terrorist attacks using a
machete against Muslims at two mosques.”

Source: “How a Sec 4 student who planned to attack mosques in S’pore was radicalised within months,” straitstimes.com (mainstream
publication Singapore), 28 January 2021. https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/how-a-sec-4-student-who-planned-to-attack-mosques-inspore-was-radicalised-within-months

OE Watch | March 2021

34

INDO-PACIFIC
Continued: A Young Singaporean Radical’s Disrupted
Road to Militancy
Source: “Parents can help steer youth away from online radicalisation,” channelnewsasia.com (Singapore based news service that sees itself
as an alternative to western media on the Pacific region), 31 January 2021. https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/parents-helpsteer-youth-away-online-radicalisation-14078080
A 16-year-old Singaporean boy planning a terror attack on Muslims at two mosques was detained under the Internal Security Act (ISA) last
month. A Protestant Christian of Indian ethnicity, he is the first detainee to be influenced by far-right extremist ideology and the youngest
person detained under the ISA for terrorism-related activities to date. The secondary student was found to have made detailed plans and
preparations to conduct terrorist attacks using a machete against Muslims at two mosque.
Here are details of how he became radicalised and his plans, released by the ISD. In late 2019, he viewed propaganda videos of the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) while surfing for violent materials and became angry after viewing a video showing the execution of Ethiopian
Christians in Libya. In late 2019, his interest was piqued by an image of Christchurch attacker Brenton Tarrant’s rifle online. The anti-Muslim
aspect of Tarrant’s ideology resonated with him. 2020 The turning point was the terror stabbings on Oct 29 last year in the Notre-Dame
basilica in Nice, France, by a 21-year-old Tunisian national, which left three people dead.
After searching for firearms online, he realised it would be difficult to get one, given the strict gun-control laws. He settled on a machete
as his weapon. He also watched YouTube videos on how to attack using a machete and was confident of hitting the arteries of his targets
by randomly slashing at the neck and chest areas. In November, he bought a tactical vest online, and planned to adorn it with right-wing
extremist symbols, which Tarrant wore. In November, he prepared two documents, which he intended to disseminate prior to his attacks.
After ISD received intelligence about a Singapore-based individual expressing a desire to attack Muslims here, it identified the student.
Given the specific nature of his plans, he was assessed as posing an imminent security threat. He was issued an order of detention on
December 23, and is the youngest person to be detained under the ISA to date.

Book Review: A Look Back and Forward at
Turkey’s “Strategic Depth” Foreign Policy Doctrine
Karen Kaya
February 2020
“Strategic Depth (Stratejik Derinlik)” is a Turkish book published
in 2001. This was a time when international relations theorists were
describing new frameworks of world order and security modalities
following the end of the Cold War and bi-polar world. Works such as
Francis Fukuyama’s “End of History” and Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of
Civilizations” were icons of this intellectual period. It was in this context
of a changing international system that Turkish International Relations
Professor Ahmet Davutoğlu (who later served as Foreign Minister
between 2009-2014 and Prime Minister between 2014-2016) attempted
to define Turkey’s position in his book “Strategic Depth.” From around
2002 to 2012, the foreign policy that Davutoğlu outlined in his book
was considered the doctrine and roadmap for Turkish foreign policy.

https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-monographs/309386
OE Watch | March 2021

35

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Tensions Escalate between Kurds and the Syrian Regime
OE Watch Commentary: The accompanying
articles provide insight into the reasons behind the
recently escalating tension between the Kurds and the
Syrian regime in northern Syria. As the first article
from al-Monitor, a news site with analysts from the
Middle East, discusses, Damascus is encouraging
Arab tribes to escalate their violence against the Kurds
to undermine the self-declared autonomous Kurdish
Administration’s control over the region. In addition,
as per an interview of a Kurdish official published
in Hawarnews.coma, pro-Kurdish news site closely
monitoring developments in northern Syria, the Syrian
regime has also increased the presence of pro-Iranian
militias in some Kurdish areas. These pro-Iranian
militias and the provocations of Arab tribes by the
Syrian regime creates instability in northern Syria,
which endangers the safety and security of American
forces stationed there.

Press conference by the spokesman of the SDF, Kino Gabriel (center).

Source: VOA, via Wikimedia, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Forces_d%C3%A9mocratiques_syriennes_22_janvier_2018.jpg, Attribution: CC-PD-Mark|PD VOA

The article also discusses some other possible triggering factors. For example, Turkey and the Syrian regime might have brokered a deal to
weaken the Kurds because the perception is that the new US administration is likely to increase support for the Syrian Kurds who both Damascus
and Ankara see as a threat. Another incentive for Russia-backed Damascus to cooperate with Ankara is the prospect of ending the US military
presence i n Syria. T he author also points out t hat some have argued t hat the Kurds might have escalated t he tension to clear t he remnants
of regime forces from Hasakah and Qamishli. However, Kurdish officials stated that the regime escalated the situation and Kurds seized the
opportunity to fully take the control of both cities. The tensions seem to be diffused for now. Both sides engaged in a dialogue with Russian
mediation in the past, but this time around Russia shows no indication that it will mediate to find a sustainable solution. In fact, when Kurds
wanted to send a delegation to Damascus for a dialogue, Russia refused to provide security guarantees to the Kurdish delegation.
The Kurdish official interviewed by Hawarnews.com states that Kurds have been in touch with Russians to de-escalate tensions. While Russian
mediation in some areas stabilized the situation locally, no progress has been made on long-term solutions. The Kurdish official claims that behind
these attacks is a coordinated strategy by the Syrian regime and Turkey to undermine territorial control of Syrian Kurds in northern Syria. End
OE Watch Commentary (Gündüz)

“Damascus is inciting Arab tribes against the Kurds to
undermine the autonomous administration and make the
region less secure for the Americans.”

In 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin and
Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov
instituted sweeping changes that have
reorganized the country’s security forces and
reestablished the nation’s military prowess.
This study, Kremlin Kontrol, aims to describe
how control over the security services and the
military have hastened those changes.
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/197266/download

OE Watch | March 2021

36

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Tensions Escalate between Kurds and the
Syrian Regime
Source: Fehim Tastekin, “How Turkey fits in regime-Kurdish showdown in Syria,” al-Monitor (a news site with analysts from the Middle
East), 4 February 2021. https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2021/02/turkey-syria-damascus-kurds-escalation-where-ankara-stands.
html
The fragile ties between Damascus and the Kurdish-led autonomous administration in northern Syria have seen a dangerous escalation…
…
Kurdish sources told Al-Monitor that the Russians did little to mediate in the crisis and declined to provide a security guarantee to a
delegation the Kurds wanted to send to Damascus…
…Intelligence contacts between Turkey and Syria make sense in the context of the common threat the two sides perceive from Kurdish
autonomy, but they are unlikely to have advanced that much yet, he said.
…According to the Syrian daily al-Watan, senior Turkish intelligence and military officials held talks in Damascus Dec. 29. Meeting on
the same day, the Turkish and Russian foreign ministers discussed the strategic town of Ain Issa, which Turkish forces had been shelling for
weeks…
The Kurds also float a scenario whereby the Russians are making use of the Turkish threat to compel the Kurds to cede territorial control to
the government, while Damascus is inciting Arab tribes against the Kurds to undermine the autonomous administration and make the region
less secure for the Americans. In other words, Damascus is trying to deter the Americans as much as possible as Washington becomes more
protective of the Kurds under new President Joe Biden.
…
The final scenario has to do with Turkey. The argument goes that Turkey’s prospects of mounting a fresh military offensive or expanding
Operation Peace Spring on the eastern bank of the Euphrates have dimmed after Biden’s victory… Turkey was believed to also eye the Derik
area on the border, which US forces use as a supply route from Iraq to Syria. The new reality, however, is forcing Ankara to abandon such
plans and seek cooperation with Damascus instead to crush the Kurdish self-rule.
From Damascus’ point of view… Another incentive to cooperate with Ankara would be the prospect of ending the US military presence in
Syria. Although reconciling Turkish and Syrian interests remains a tall order, observers do not rule out the possibility of a pragmatic TurkishSyrian understanding against Kurdish-held areas to the east of the Euphrates. A destabilized northeastern Syria might curb the Americans’
incentives to stay in the region, which would serve the interests of both Damascus and Ankara.

Source: “Çiya Kurd: Provokasyon encama hevkariya hikumeta Şamê û dewleta Tirk e (Çiya Kurd: The provocation is the result of
cooperation between the government of Damascus and the Turkish state),” Hawarnews.com (a pro-Kurdish news site closely monitoring
developments in northern Syria), 30 January 2021. https://www.hawarnews.com/kr/roportaj/ciya-kurd-provokasyon-encama-hevkariyahikumeta-sam-dewleta-tirk-e-r181.html
Bedran Çiya Kurd stated that they did not meet with Damascus… and instead met with Russia, “Russia should fulfill its responsibilities and
end the provocations.”
…
According to available information, the Damascus government has increased its power in the region. It especially increased the Fatimiyun
Battalion affiliated with Iran.
…
The Damascus government and the Turkish state are collaborating. On one hand, the Turkish state makes threats, while on the other hand,
the Damascus government carries out attacks. They want to continue the attacks on the region from all directions.

OE Watch | March 2021

37

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Zuljanah: Iran’s New Solid-Fuel Rocket
OE Watch Commentary: Iran’s satellite launch
program is of increasing policy concern in the United
States and Europe because of the applicability toward
ballistic missiles of the technology used to launch
satellites. At issue is a legal loophole: Prior to the
2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
the United Nations viewed satellite launches through
the lens of the nuclear program, but the Iran nuclear
deal changed legal interpretation. Rather than ban
rockets with the capability to carry nuclear warheads,
Annex B of UN Security Council Resolution 2231,
which enshrined the JCPOA into the UN system,
“call[ed] upon Iran not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable
of delivering nuclear weapons, including launches 1 February 2021 launch of the Zuljanah three-stage “satellite carrier” from the Imam Khomeini Space Base in
Semnan, Iran.
Source: Fars News Agency, https://media.farsnews.ir/Uploaded/Files/Images/1399/11/14/13991114000857_Test_PhotoN.jpg
using such ballistic missile technology.” The Iranian
government has argued that it designs its rockets to carry satellites and not warheads and that therefore they are legal.
The latest Iranian rocket test described in the excerpted article from the Fars News Agency, a service with close ties to the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps, may further raise concerns about the dual-purpose potential of Iran’s rocket program. While previous Iranian rockets such as the
Simorgh and Qiam were liquid fueled, the Iranian military described the Zuljanah rocket as solid fueled, at least in its first two stages. A shift
to solid-fuel rockets would be significant for Iran because it allows for both easier fuel storage and more compact rockets. While multi-stage
rockets are useful for launching satellites or other payloads into orbit as they enable the rocket to shed deadweight once the fuel is expended,
the technology is also necessary for an intercontinental ballistic missile should Iranian authorities end their own self-imposed moratorium on
developing missiles with a range of more than 2,000 kilometers (1250 miles).
At 84 feet, the Zuljanah is about one-quarter the size of the Saturn V, which was 363 feet tall, and slightly less than one-third the size of the
SpaceX Heavy Falcon, which is 230 feet tall. The Zuljanah’s 200-kilogram payload would be sufficient in theory for a nuclear warhead; the W80
low-to-intermediate yield nuclear warhead produced by the United States in the late 1970s weighs only 110 kilograms. It is not clear, however, that
Iranian engineers could build such a compact warhead even if they wanted to.
While much of the policy concern about Iran’s satellite launch ambitions may be theoretical, the biggest immediate concern should the Zuljanah
be successful is the Iranian military’s claim that it operates from mobile launchers. This will in turn raise suspicion about Iranian intentions, given
that the mobility of launchers is not generally a concern when launching civilian satellites. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“The Zuljanah can be launched from a mobile launch pad”
Source: “‘Zuljanah’ Dastavarad-e Jadid Faza-ye Keshavar ba Qadratmandtarin Motor Sokht Jamid (‘Zuljanah’ the Country’s Newest
Space Achievement Equipped with the Most Powerful Solid Fuel Engine),” Fars News Agency (News agency with close ties to the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps), 2 February 2021. https://www.farsnews.ir/news/13991114000994
Zuljanah, a three-stage solid fuel satellite, is the latest space achievement of the country in the field of indigenous satellites. The Space
Group of the Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics announced news of its launch from Imam Khomeini Space Base in Semnan
yesterday. The Zuljanah was first mentioned in February 2020, and after the unsuccessful launch of the Zafar satellite by the Simorgh rocket,
the minister of Defense announced the launch of this satellite carrier this year….
The Zuljanah is 25.5 meters long, weighs 52 tons, and has three stages. The first and second stages have 1.5 meter-diameter solid fuel
engines with a capacity of 75 tons (expandable to 100 tons) and a third-stage liquid fuel engine. With a diameter of 1.25 meters, the engine of
the third stage of this satellite is in fact the same as the engine of the second stage of the Safir rocket.
The Zuljanah uses solid fuel in its first and second stages, unlike the Safir, Simorgh and Ghased satellite launchers that use liquid fuel in
their first stage…. The Zuljanah is able to carry 200 kilograms of cargo, which can place one or more satellites with a total weight of 200
kg into orbit up to 500 kilometers above earth. Another feature of Zuljanah is that it does not need a fixed base for launching and it can be
launched from a mobile launch pad from anywhere in the country.
OE Watch | March 2021

38

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Enemies Will Be Destroyed with Missile Power
OE Watch Commentary: The Iranian military has made
its missile program a pillar of its asymmetrical warfare
program. While Iranian small boats and unmanned aerial
vehicles can counter adversaries at short and medium
ranges, Iran’s vulnerability has long been confronting
adversaries operating outside the range of its boats and
planes. Crudely put, while U.S. or other aircraft carriers
operating in the Persian Gulf might be vulnerable to various
Iranian platforms, the same aircraft carriers operating in
the northern Indian Ocean would effectively be immune
from Iranian attack simply because they were out-of-range.
Iran’s missile program may slowly be eroding the immunity
born of distance, however.
In the excerpted article from Mashregh News, an
outlet close to Iran’s intelligence and security apparatus,
Mohammad Bagheri, chief of General Staff of the Armed
Forces, announces the latest iteration of annual military
A Missile Launch During the Great Prophet-15 Exercises.
Source: Mizan Online, https://www.mizanonline.com/files/fa/news/1399/10/27/2938354_122.jpg
exercises. The exercises included the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps’ successful launch of missiles at targets more
than 1100 miles away in the northern Indian Ocean. However, while Iranian television showed footage of both the launch and the alleged
destruction of targets, the Iranian press often doctors or misrepresents coverage to exaggerate success or cover up failure. Nevertheless, the missile
test does elucidate an increasingly important element of Iranian deterrence, one Bagheri underlined when he threatened to use Iran’s evolving
missile power to strike not only at an adversary’s naval ships, but also its maritime trade. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“They have maritime trade which can targeted and
destroyed by missiles.”

Source: “Entekhab-e Ahdaf Razmayesh Payambar ‘Azam-15 dar ‘Amagh 1500-kilometer Aghiyanos-e Hind Mo’anandar Ast” (The Choice of
Targets in the Great Prophet-15 Exercises 1800 Kilometers Away in the Indian Ocean is Significant),” Mashregh News (outlet close to Iran’s
intelligence and security apparatus), 16 January 2021. https://www.mashreghnews.ir/news/1168797
Major General Mohammad Bagheri, chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, spoke on the sidelines of the final stage of the 15th Great
Prophet Exercises of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which were held in the general region of the central desert of Iran, and said:
“The exercises of the past 15 days and the upcoming five days, which are intensive and almost conducted almost simultaneously, show the
extraordinary readiness of the armed forces in all dimensions of land, air, sea and air and missile defense.”
…General Bagheri described the choice of targets at a distance of more than 1,800 kilometers south of the Oman Sea and in the Indian
Ocean as meaningful and said, “If the enemies of Iran have malicious intent toward our national interests, they have maritime trade which
can targeted and destroyed by missiles…. Although we do not intend to carry out any attack, if the adversary acts with bad intentions towards
our country, he will be attacked with Iran’s missile power in the shortest time possible.”

OE Watch | March 2021

39

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Iran: Reconstruction and Overhaul of Helicopters
OE Watch Commentary: Iraq’s 1980 invasion of Iran
exploited a huge Iranian vulnerability. Under the shah, imperial
Iran had invested billions of dollars in a top-shelf military replete
with platforms purchased from the United States. After the 1979
Revolution and the new Iranian regime’s seizure of the American
hostages, the Iranian government was unable to get its purchases
delivered or spare parts to operate existing aircraft. While the
Islamic Republic ultimately survived the Iraqi onslaught, the
lasting strategic lesson for the Iranian government was that it
needed an indigenous capability to produce and upgrade existing
platforms. Often, Iranian officials discuss their ability to upgrade
jetfighters like the F-14s, which Iran still flies almost a half
century after their purchase. In the excerpted article from the
Iranian Labour News Agency, a semi-official outlet that began
covering labor issues but now also covers general news and
defense, Second Brigadier General (equivalent to an O-7) Yousef
Ghorbani, commander of the Army Air Force, discusses Iran’s
success at overhauling and upgrading Iran’s substantial helicopter
Iranian Army Helicopters prepare to conduct COVID-19 Disinfection Flights, March 2020.
fleet. For Iran, this is an important capability both because its
Source: Jam News, https://media.jamnews.com/medium1/1398/12/25/JamNewsImage21162007.PNG
helicopter fleet is its military’s workhorse and because of the
harsh environments in which its helicopters must operate. As the Iranian military increases its Makran Coast operations along the Gulf of Oman,
it must rely on helicopters to compensate for the lack of roads and difficult terrain. Ghorbani also noted that night vision capabilities are becoming
more standard for Iranian helicopters, which shapes the operational environment because it signifies an important domestic capability for a key
regional adversary, as well as possibly its anti-American proxies, such as Lebanese Hezbollah and the Houthi militias in Yemen, with whom Iran
often shares technology. End OE Watch Commentary (Rubin)

“Last year, we succeeded in overhauling 40 helicopters”

Source: “Bazsazi va Overhawl-e Balgerdha ba Talash-e Motakhasasan-e Havaniruz” (Reconstruction and overhaul of helicopters with
the efforts of aviation specialists),” Iranian Labour News Agency (a semi-official outlet that began covering labor issues but now also
covers general news and defense), 5 February 2021. https://www.ilna.news/‫شخب‬-‫یسایس‬-3/1034075-‫یزاسزاب‬-‫لاهروا‬-‫درگلاب‬-‫اه‬-‫اب‬-‫شالت‬‫ناصصختم‬-‫زوریناوه‬
Second Brigadier General and Pilot Yousef Ghorbani, commander of the Army Air Force, stated at the end of the overhaul of seven attack,
reconnaissance and transport helicopters conducted at the First Air Base of Kermanshah, “Last year, we succeeded in overhauling 40
helicopters, which shows the knowledge and expertise of the native forces of this land.” Brigadier General Ghorbani said, “From zero to
100 percent reconstruction and overhaul of helicopters is done with the efforts of aviation specialists and we have reached complete selfsufficiency in this field.” He also spoke about the night vision system: “This system used to belong to several countries, but today it has
reached the stage of indigenous development with the capable hands of knowledge-based companies and aviation employees, and we can
operate flights now during the day and night.”

OE Watch | March 2021

40

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Growing Iranian Influence Near the Border with Israel in
Southwest Syria
OE Watch Commentary: Iranian influence continues to
grow in the western half of Syria’s Daraa Province, near the
border with Israel. The eastern half of the province is largely
under the control of the Russia-backed 8th Brigade, an umbrella
formation that brings together former rebels who entered into
Russia-brokered “reconciliation” agreements with the Syrian
regime in 2018. This brigade is led by a former rebel leader
named Ahmed Al-Oda and nominally operates under the
command of the Russia-controlled 5th Corps of the Syrian
military. In Daraa’s western half and the adjacent province
of Quneitra, near the border with Israel, Russian influence
is limited. Iranian influence, in contrast, is significant and
continues to grow. As noted in the first accompanying excerpt,
from the Qatar-aligned daily al-Araby al-Jadid, Iran’s leverage
in Daraa comes not only from the presence of militias linked
to Lebanese Hezbollah and Iran’s Quds Force, but also from
close relations with high-level officers in the Syrian security
and military institutions, particularly the Syrian Army’s 4th
Division and the local branches of Syria’s two main military
security agencies, the directorates of Military Intelligence and
Air Force Intelligence.
Daraa Province Location.

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Daraa_in_Syria_2016.svg, Attribution: CC BY-SA 3.0 DE
The 4th Division, which is controlled by Bashar al-Assad’s
brother Maher, is an elite unit in the Syrian Army. Its relationship with Iran blossomed early in the Syrian conflict, after Iran was the sole country
to provide the Assad regime with substantial military assistance. With Russia’s 2015 entry into the Syrian battlefield, high-ranking officers and
warlords throughout the Syrian loyalist universe shifted from Iranian to Russian patronage. There is no indication of such a shift in the 4th
Division’s upper echelons, particularly insofar as their activities in Daraa are concerned, which are regularly characterized by opposition media
as tightly aligned with Iranian interests. Over the past year, the 4th Division has increased its presence in the western half of Daraa, emerging as
the main fulcrum of Syrian army presence there. As reported in the second passage, also from al-Araby al-Jadid, the 4th Division continues to
reinforce its positions in the western parts of the province, intending to consolidate its control over reconciled communities that remain resistant
to joining either it or a node of the Hezbollah-run militia network.

Last November, Major General Abdel Salam Mahmoud was appointed as the head of the Air Force Intelligence directorate for Syria’s southern
provinces (Daraa, Sweida, and Quneitra). According to the accompanying excerpt from the Syrian opposition news website Zaman al-Wasl, the
appointment was made at Iran’s behest. The article notes that Mahmoud secretly visited Tehran immediately before assuming his new duties,
though the claim is uncorroborated and attributed to an anonymous source. Yet there is reason to believe a close connection: Mahmoud is a native
of the now-vacated Shiite town of al-Fu’ah, in rebel-controlled Idlib Province. In Syria, adherents of the religious practices and beliefs associated
with Iran (“Twelver Shiites”) represent a mere 1% of the pre-war population. Those in positions of influence, such as Mahmoud, can be expected
to be among Iran’s most reliable Syrian allies. End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Among the issues that raise concern for many parties is the direct
Iranian presence or through local proxies in southern Syria…in
addition to Iranian penetration of regime forces, especially the 4th
Division and the military security apparatus…”

OE Watch | March 2021

41

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Growing Iranian Influence Near the Border
with Israel in Southwest Syria
Source:

“‫مؤرشات حراك رويس أردين الحتواء النفوذ اإليراين يف درعا‬

(Indications of Russian-Jordanian Moves to Contain Iranian Influence in Daraa),” al-Araby al-Jadid (prominent, Qatari-aligned daily), 5
November 2020. https://tinyurl.com/ovy4wewd

Among the issues that raise concern for many parties is the direct Iranian presence or through local proxies in southern Syria. The data
indicate that the recruitment of Iranian militias in southern Syria continues secretly and openly, whether by offering financial inducements or
security guarantees… This in addition to Iranian penetration of regime forces, especially the 4th Division and the military security apparatus.
The Observatory stated that the recruitment and “Shiitization” of young men and women is carried out through entities belonging to Iran and
Hezbollah, such as the Al-Areen Brigades, affiliated to the 313 Brigade located in northern Daraa, in addition to centers in Saida, Dael and
Izraa. The new recruits undergo training courses in the Lajat area, east of Daraa, and close to the borders with the occupied Syrian Golan in
Quneitra Province. They attract young men fleeing the regime’s security services because of compulsory and reserve service.
Source:

“‫الفرقة الرابعة املوالية إليران تنترش بريف درعا وتعتقل مدنيني‬

(The Pro-Iran 4th Division Deploys in Rural Daraa and Arrests Civilians), “al-Araby al-Jadid (prominent, Qatari-aligned daily), 23 January
2021. https://tinyurl.com/j7fdxby6
Units from the Syrian regime’s 4th Division deployed in the western countryside of Daraa Province, in southern Syria, today (Saturday),
following meetings held by the division’s officers with local delegates, in which they demanded the handover of dozens of wanted men to the
regime…

These moves came two days after the 4th Division brought in large military reinforcements to its sites in Daraa Province last Thursday,
including dozens of vehicles, tanks and trucks loaded with military and logistical equipment, and personnel from the capital, Damascus. It is
likely that the reinforcements came in order to carry out a major security campaign that the pro-Iranian 4th Division is preparing to launch in
Daraa, especially its western countryside…
Source:

“‫األسد يسند املسؤولية األمنية جنوب سوريا لضابط مق ّرب من إيران‬

(Assad Assigns Security Responsibilities in Southern Daraa to Officer Close to Iran),” Zaman al-Wasl (Syrian opposition news website), 20
November 2020. https://www.zamanalwsl.net/news/article/132163/
Zaman al-Wasl learned that the Assad regime decided to appoint Major General Abdel Salam Mahmoud deputy director of the Air Force
Intelligence Department, in charge of the security files in southern Syria’s three provinces: Daraa, Sweida, and Quneitra.
A private source confirmed that the appointment of Mahmoud, who comes from the town of al-Fu’ah in Idlib’s countryside, came at the
request of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard. The source notes that the officer, who belongs to the Shiite sect, visited Tehran secretly for
several days before starting his duties as a security official in charge of southern Syria.
The source attributed the support of the Revolutionary Guards in particular and the Iranian government in general to Major General Abd
al-Salam Mahmoud. In addition to his sectarian affiliation, he is one of the senior security figures in the Air Force Intelligence who spilled
Syrian blood, especially as the longtime head of the terrifying Investigations Branch of the Air Intelligence Administration Stationed at
Mazzeh airport from 2010 to 2019, when he was appointed as deputy director of the administration, under the command of Major General
Ghassan Ismail, after the retirement of the former director of the administration, Major General Jamil al-Hassan.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF WAR by
LESTER W. GRAU and CHARLES K. BARTLES
At any given time, assessments of the Russian Armed Forces vary between the idea of an incompetent and corrupt conscript army manning decrepit Soviet equipment and relying solely on
brute force, to the idea of an elite military filled with Special Operations Forces (SOF) who were
the “polite people” or “little green men” seen on the streets in Crimea. This book will attempt to
split the difference between these radically different ideas by shedding some light on what the
Russian Ground Forces consist of, how they are structured, how they fight, and how they are
modernizing.

DOWNLOAD AT:
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/199251/download
OE Watch | March 2021

42

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued Growth and Development in Domestic HighTech Military Industries of Saudi Arabia and the UAE
OE Watch Commentary: Among the most consequential military trends in the Middle East is the indigenous development and production of
autonomous weapons systems and other platforms relying on new technologies. Saudi Arabia and the UAE have been at the forefront of developing
these capabilities, focusing on the localization of ownership and production in their defense industries, while at the same time investing extensively
in new technologies associated with the “Fourth Industrial Revolution.” To foster and grow their domestic high-tech military industries, each of
the two countries has in recent years established a new entity: the EDGE conglomerate in the UAE and the Saudi Arabian Military Industries
(SAMI) in Saudi Arabia (see: “Saudi Arabia and the UAE Streamline Military Industry,” OE Watch, January 2020). EDGE was formed in late
2019, as a merger of the UAE’s main defense manufacturers. SAMI was established in 2017 as the main vehicle for achieving the Saudi Vision
2030 goal of localizing 50% of Saudi military spending by 2030.
The accompanying articles, from local English-language publications, highlight recent developments in Saudi and Emirati efforts to grow their
domestic military industries. The first passage, from the EDGE website, reports that last December it became the first Middle Eastern weapons
company to rank among the 25 largest defense companies in the world, according to an annual list published by the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). In the second passage, from the English-language Emirati daily The National, EDGE’s CEO explains how the
Coronavirus pandemic has further underlined the importance of localizing production, given the ruptures it has caused in the global supply chain.
Last summer, the UAE established the Advanced Technology Research Council (ATRC). The council’s director general is also EDGE’s CEO, and
its research is likely to feed into priority sectors for EDGE. As reported in the third accompanying passage, also from The National, the ARTC’s
priorities are “autonomous robotics, advanced materials, cryptography, digital security, directed energy, quantum computing and secure systems.”
The final accompanying passage, from the Saudi English-language daily Arab News, comes from a January 2021 interview with SAMI’s CEO.
In it, he alludes to SAMI’s recent acquisition of the Advanced Electronics Company (AEC), a maker of high-tech military equipment that was
previously a Saudi-foreign joint venture. He mentions SAMI’s goal of becoming “among the top 25 defense companies in the world by 2030” and
explains that it intends to do so by focusing on specific sectors, including “defense electronics.” End OE Watch Commentary (Winter)

“Advanced technologies have enabled us to thrive, be bold, agile and
disruptive in an era of hybrid warfare…”

Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (2017).

Source: lawepw https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Riyadh,_Saudi_Arabia_(2048x1367)_(36864830374).jpg, Attribution: Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons

OE Watch | March 2021

43

MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA
Continued: Continued Growth and Development in
Domestic High-Tech Military Industries of Saudi Arabia
and the UAE
Source: “EDGE First in Middle East to be Ranked Among Top 25 Military Companies in the World,” EDGE Group, 9 December 2020.
https://edgegroup.ae/news/559
Marking its first year, EDGE, the UAE’s advanced technology group for defence and beyond, was ranked among the top 25 military suppliers
in the world by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), a think tank that specialises in data analysis of military
expenditure and arms trade among other peace and security related matters… Commenting on the new data released, H.E. Faisal Al Bannai,
CEO and Managing Director, EDGE said…“Advanced technologies have enabled us to thrive, be bold, agile and disruptive in an era of
hybrid warfare. As we continue to build the UAE’s sovereign capabilities and develop partnerships for export growth, we remain excited
about what the future holds”.

Source: “UAE’s Edge eyes chips and drones for charting a post-Covid course,” The National (prominent Emirati English-language daily), 30
September 2020. https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/uae-s-edge-eyes-chips-and-drones-for-charting-a-post-covid-course-1.1084965
To that end, Edge is looking to localise production of a greater number of component parts and the platforms that enable autonomous
vehicles and drones, he said… “Those who control the skies control the military landscape,” Mr Al Bannai said. Given the UAE’s relatively
small population of less than 10 million, “drones and autonomous capabilities are a strategic need for our future”.

Source: “Abu Dhabi’s new Advanced Technology Research Council approves seven R&D priorities,” The National (prominent Emirati
English-language daily), 18 August 2020. https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/technology/abu-dhabi-s-new-advanced-technologyresearch-council-approves-seven-r-d-priorities-1.1065354
The seven priorities set out by the council are: autonomous robotics, advanced materials, cryptography, digital security, directed energy,
quantum computing and secure systems.

Source: “INTERVIEW: Head of SAMI explains how he wants to build Saudi Arabia’s defenses through homegrown industry,” Arab News
(prominent Saudi English-language daily), 10 January 2021. https://www.arabnews.com/node/1790031/business-economy
SAMI was set up with five main divisions: Aeronautics, land systems, defense electronics, weapons and missiles, and emerging technologies.
One of its main mandates — under the regulatory supervision of the General Authorities for Military Industries — is to support research and
development of new defense technology. The aim is for SAMI to be ranked among the top 25 defense companies in the world by 2030, and the
acquisition of AEC has given it a big push in that direction, taking many years off the timescale toward that goal… The deal also brings AEC
under the umbrella of the Public Investment Fund (PIF) — the Kingdom’s sovereign wealth fund and owner of SAMI — and the multibilliondollar resources the PIF has… Abukhaled recognizes that there are limitations as to the kind of equipment and systems the Kingdom will
be able to manufacture on its own. “To design and manufacture very sophisticated fifth-generation fighter jets, for example, isn’t going to
happen in the near future. It’s a huge amount of investment,” he said. “But I think I’d turn the question around and ask what kind of things we
can’t make. There are so many things that can be done immediately. Maintenance, repair and overhaul for example, UAVs (unmanned aerial
vehicles), defense electronics, land systems — all these are feasible now”… Such ambitious plans are now feasible because Saudi Arabia has a
cadre of well-trained and experienced engineers who have learned their skill at some of the biggest international defense companies, and are
ready to apply those skills at home.

OE Watch | March 2021

44

AFRICA
South Africa: Too Many High Ranking Officers, Too Little
Money
OE Watch Commentary: According to the South
African Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military
Veterans, the South African National Defence Force
(SANDF) is top heavy with generals and admirals.
As the excerpted accompanying article from South
African Trade Publication DefenceWeb notes, there is
one general, admiral, or equivalent official for every
184 personnel in the DoD/SANDF, a ratio far greater
than those of most Western militaries. Furthermore,
out of the country’s more than 400 generals, only 97 are
assigned to combat or intelligence services.
This imbalance has its roots in the precursor to the
SANDF, the SA Defence Force (SADF). As a result, the
present day military now has numerous situations where
a post previously headed by a colonel with a small staff
is now headed by a general with a large staff.
The problems of a top-heavy military are compounded
by SANDF’s shrinking budgets over the past years,
a casualty of the country’s economic troubles. A
South African soldier.
Source: MONUSCO Photos/Wikimedia, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/10/FIB-training-03_%289314147732%29.jpg
military already constrained by funds must allocate a
disproportionate amount to high-ranking officers. As a result, other priorities, such as training, facilities, maritime security, and even personnel
end strength can suffer. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“… rank inflation poses “a major risk” to a sustainable DoD
as far as personnel strength and costs are concerned.”

Source: “SANDF is top-heavy with generals – Parliamentary research report,” DefenceWeb (a South African trade publication), 3 February
2021. https://www.defenceweb.co.za/featured/sandf-is-top-heavy-with-generals-parliamentary-research-report/
A partial answer comes from respected military analyst Helmoed Heitman. He is quoted as telling a Joint Standing Committee on Defence
(JSCD) meeting rank inflation poses “a major risk” to a sustainable DoD as far as personnel strength and costs are concerned. This
phenomenon dates back to the then SA Defence Force (SADF), forerunner of the SANDF in what is now democratic South Africa.
There are similar examples in the SA Air Force (SAAF) from a brigadier (before the new rank system was introduced) handling personnel
matters to a brigadier general in each of the Air Office and Air Command, this despite a centralised Human Resources Division. The SA Navy
(SAN) also has many senior admirals for a relatively small navy with limited vessels.

OE Watch | March 2021

45

AFRICA
Uganda: Museveni’s Strategic Use of Violence to Retain
the Presidency
OE Watch Commentary: The lead-up to the January 2021 election
that saw Yoweri Museveni reelected as President of Uganda, a role he
has held since 1986, was at times violent. At least seven individuals
were killed and many more injured. That period was also marred
by repeated harassment and intimidation of the main opposition
leader, Bobi Wine, and his supporters by members of the security
forces. However, as the excerpted accompanying article from African
Arguments, a pan-African news platform from the Royal African
Society, reports, Museveni was careful not to promulgate so much
violence as to enrage international backers to the point they would
no longer support him. Still, despite his efforts, there has been some
blowback.
Museveni’s experience with previous elections helped him learn the
limits as to how far he can push. The 2006 arrest of the opposition
candidate on fabricated rape charges and the arrest and torture of Bobi
Wine in 2018 led to large protests in Uganda and strong condemnation
Ugandan soldiers serving as peacekepers in Somalia.
outside the country. This time by clamping down early on opposition Source: AMISOM/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/au_unistphotostream/14905611398/in/photolist-oHa9XY-7zVhGo-7zV66Y-9BX4QJ-7b3hFt9BxwRY-8r8Njr-8rbVs9-7dhSbx-7dmK5L-7Mv6cx-bmv8eT-QUSTmX-7dhSuv-79kmJJ-79v6Th-79JKKW-oYXkrf-9Bxwsd-7zV4j7-zqJWEf-787YSs-eciXpLsupporters, containing the flow of negative information by moving 7dmD95-bmUtFJ-7dmG6J-pQc8gS-rKs5J5-7zRj5B-Tz1gLu-9CAbEy-9BX5Aq-7avm1T-7zV48S-7zV4Dy-gH2oeA-7XnajD-e1Y1rB-bsU4oe-7dmL3y7dmKG5-7dmDLq-7dmH4Q-r5MCe1-7dmJ9N-Ka9dLd-9BU5pZ-dADqDX-9BX33s-23uU3iL, Attribution: Public Domain
violent repression to areas less prone to press coverage, and spreading
money around, Museveni was probably able to lessen some of the blows to his image. That there was still oppression, violence, and intimidation
during this recent election is not in doubt, and the anger among Ugandans against what he did is strong. However, he remains in power and even
appears to be grooming his son, a former Special Forces commander, to succeed him as president.
Despite Museveni’s repressive actions, Uganda so far remains stable in a region that is often in turmoil. With foreign businesses investing in
Kampala, and Western diplomats periodically calling for Ugandan soldiers to serve as peacekeepers, an action that is economically beneficial
to the Ugandan government, it is to Museveni’s benefit to control the intensity and duration of his military’s brutal repression so as not to overly
offend these foreign interests. However, it is uncertain if his attempt this time to strategically use violence for political gain went too far. End OE
Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“Repeated arrests and office raids are part of a strategy
designed to project control without overly provoking
domestic or international criticism.”
Source: Kristof Titec and Anna Reuss, “How Museveni mastered violence to win elections in Uganda,” African Arguments (a pan-African
platform for news from the Royal African Society), 19 November 2020. https://africanarguments.org/2020/11/how-museveni-masteredviolence-to-win-elections-in-uganda/
Repeated arrests and office raids are part of a strategy designed to project control without overly provoking domestic or international
criticism.
A key strategy of the Museveni regime is to clamp down as early and consistently as possible. Even from early in the election campaign,
police will violently break up opposition events, raid or close their party offices, and arrest their leaders for brief periods – as happened
yesterday.
Another part of this tactic is to take violent repression out of the main centres of attention. Instead of targeting high-level figures, the NRM
focuses attacks on and abductions on opposition figures with lower profiles or outside Kampala. These actions attract less media attention but
no less effectively spread the message of dominance at the grassroots.
The regime has also used money to attract support, particularly among the youth. President Museveni hands out brown envelopes full of
cash to individuals and associations around elections, while candidates spend tens of thousands of dollars in the course of their campaigns.
While effective and now expected among the electorate, limitless patronage is not without risks. In 2011, the plundering of state coffers for
campaign spending saw inflation skyrocket after the elections.
OE Watch | March 2021

46

AFRICA
Nigeria: Governor Wants Mercenaries to Combat Boko
Haram
OE Watch Commentary: The idea of hiring mercenaries to combat
Boko Haram is not new. However, as the excerpted accompanying article
from the South African non-profit think tank Institute for Security Studies
notes, Nigeria’s Borno State governor has called on the government to hire
mercenaries to combat the terrorist organization. Whether the government’s
inability to defeat Boko Haram is due to issues with its military’s training,
leadership, or materiel is not described. However, the article is clear that there
is widespread concern among the region’s population that the government
alone is not up to the job.
Mercenaries have long been employed in African nations. Nigeria most
recently used mercenaries to stop Boko Haram attacks before the 2015
elections. Before that, from 1967 to 1970, both Nigeria and the secessionist
state of Biafra brought in mercenaries. However, despite the previous use
of these guns for hire, Nigeria’s current president, Muhammadu Buhari,
has condemned their use. Given the African Union’s Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, which Nigeria ratified, it appears
that at least at the national level there is little appetite for engaging their
services.

Are mercenaries needed to assist Nigerian soldiers, such as those pictured here, in
their effort to combat Boko Haram?

Source: USAFRICOM/Flickr, https://www.flickr.com/photos/africom/50111205042/in/photolist-2jma2pQ-diWZMK-2eJhvgh-diX4oHdiWZAr-7eBNui-2gjexQb-ffFJot-e3yuMp-2hCnNT5-26k4pWK-eMTwa3-JdKQnW-23ADbY5-2hCnSXT-2epyJUw-2hCjWzk-2hCjWNm-diX24D-diWZHv-7ZkExZ-7eBNwv-diX4yp-diX4tn-2hCoKVA-23wouWo-diWXYU-7XPCT4-7XDnRN-diX2oQ-diWYzm-8uNPNs-7XA9iXdiWYKo-7XSWuo-7XPzUg-7XDo5U-7XDnYu-7XDo3q-87zH7W-diWY7m-2hCjWAh-2hCoQ4q-epw7qP-23ApooY-24ZvUWZ-26hNdn57ZeuSt-7Zi1gw-7ZetsF, Attribution: CC BY 2.0

Interestingly, as the article points out, the 2015 contingent of mercenaries had significant success in reclaiming territory from Boko Haram.
Reportedly, the South African mercenaries employed a doctrine known as “relentless pursuit.” Unfortunately for the Nigerians, when the
mercenaries left over nonpayment of their services, some of the gains against Boko Haram were erased. However, their achievements before
leaving are one of the reasons the Borno State governor is calling once again for private military contractors to return to Nigeria. The ongoing
success of mercenaries in neighboring Cameroon, along with serious concerns regarding their costs and possible human rights violations, provides
points both for and against their use in Nigeria. End OE Watch Commentary (Feldman)

“A Nigerian governor’s call for mercenaries to support
the counter-insurgency revives questions about a
controversial practice.”
Source: Teniola Tayo, “Soldiers for Rent in the Boko Haram Crisis,” Institute for Security Studies (a South African non-profit think tank
emphasizing security related issues), 8 February 2021. https://issafrica.org/iss-today/soldiers-for-rent-in-the-boko-haram-crisis
A Nigerian governor’s call for mercenaries to support the counter-insurgency revives questions about a controversial practice.
The profit-driven motivations of mercenaries and the companies hiring them should never be underestimated, and their private contractor
status also makes it difficult to hold them accountable. There are allegations that mercenaries have also been recruited by Boko Haram.
Mercenaries have a rich and chequered history in Africa including in countries like Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Libya and Sierra Leone. Experience has repeatedly shown the dangers of resorting to these fighters. Still, they have enduring appeal to some
African governments, most recently in Mozambique.
Whether mercenaries should again be recruited in the war against Boko Haram remains a valid question. Victory in the war against
extremism in the Lake Chad Basin has been slow to materialise and attacks are recorded weekly. South African mercenaries appear eager to
return to the region, with the Conella representative saying, ‘We would like to come back and finish the work that we started in Nigeria.’

OE Watch | March 2021

47

LATIN AMERICA
Mexico Arrests Police Accused of Human Rights Abuses

On Federal Police day, former president Enrique Peña Nieto performs a review of the
Mexican Federal Police, 2018.

OE Watch Commentary: Mexico has arrested 12 police officers
allegedly involved in a recent massacre of Central American migrants.
According to Infobae, a center to center-left Argentine news outlet with
excellent regional reporting, the burned bodies of 19 migrants turned
up in Tamaulipas state near the U.S. border. The article states that this
area is well known for intense fighting between Mexico’s Zetas and
Gulf cartels. Further, Infobae notes that in the past, Mexican police
have collaborated often with criminal groups, such as a massacre of
43 students in the southwestern city of Iguala in 2014. Animal Político,
a popular investigative outlet in Mexico, speculates that this incident
could prove further collaboration between police and Mexican cartels.
It reports that Mexican authorities, including the Interior Minister,
vowed to crack down on official impunity. This particular case will be
a major test of Mexico’s ability to root out impunity in its police and
armed forces. End OE Watch Commentary (Berg)

Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Presidential_review_of_Mexican_Federal_Police,_on_2018_Federal_Police_Day.jpg
Attribution: Wikimedia Commons

“President Andrés Manuel López Obrador promised when he came
to power in December 2018 to end the murders and kidnappings
committed by authorities, but the links between the security forces
and organized crime have proven difficult to eliminate.”

Source: “Arrestaron a 12 policías implicados en la masacre de Tamaulipas que dejó 19 cadáveres calcinados (They arrested 12 policemen
involved in the Tamaulipas massacre that left 19 burned corpses),” Infobae (Argentine center to center-left news outlet with excellent regional
reporting), 3 February 2021. https://www.infobae.com/america/mexico/2021/02/03/arrestaron-a-12-policias-implicados-en-la-masacre-detamaulipas-que-dejo-19-cadaveres-calcinados/
If the participation of law enforcement officials is confirmed, the case would evoke the kidnapping and apparent massacre in 2014 of 43
students in the southwestern city of Iguala by corrupt police officers who collaborated with a drug gang…President Andrés Manuel López
Obrador promised when he came to power in December 2018 to end the murders and kidnappings committed by authorities, but the links
between the security forces and organized crime have proven difficult to eliminate.

Source: “Fiscalía de Tamaulipas reconoce participación de policías estatales en masacre de Camargo: hay 12 detenidos (Tamaulipas
Prosecutor’s Office recognizes the participation of state police in the Camargo massacre: there are 12 detainees),” Animal Político (a well read
investigative outlet in Mexico), 2 February 2021. https://www.animalpolitico.com/2021/02/fiscalia-tamaulipas-policias-estatales-masacrecamargo-detenidos/
The prosecutor indicated that they believe that the agents altered the crime scene, since there were no casings and ammunition that matched
the shots that the attacked pickup truck received. In addition, contradictions were detected between the police report and the interviews with
the agents…The massacre occurred weeks after the president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, assured the country that the human rights of
migrants are no longer violated in Mexico. The Secretary of the Interior, Olga Sánchez Cordero…predicted that in this case there would be
no impunity.

OE Watch | March 2021

48

LATIN AMERICA
Colombia Creates Elite Commando Unit to Combat
Venezuela-Based Rebels
OE Watch Commentary: Colombian President Iván Duque recently
announced the creation of a new elite commando unit within the country’s
armed forces, slated to begin operations in May 2021. The stated purpose of
the unit is to fight drug trafficking organizations and Marxist rebels based out
of neighboring Venezuela. As reported by Noticiero Digital, a well known
center to center-right leaning Venezuelan media outlet, Duque stated that
these groups are “protected” by Nicolás Maduro’s government in Venezuela.
According to the article, Colombian intelligence estimates that approximately
1,400 members of armed groups operate out of Venezuela, conducting crossborder operations in Colombia. An article in La Jornada, a popular and
generally left-leaning Mexican daily with reporting throughout Latin America,
notes that Duque singled out guerrilla groups such as the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) in his
announcement. Despite the Colombian government signing a peace accord
with the FARC in 2016, dissident members of the group remain active; the
ELN, moreover, was not a party to that agreement. As one of the most capable
armed forces in the region, Colombia’s decision could shape the operational
environment if its new commandos are able to add serious weight to the fight
against transnational guerrilla groups. Duque did not say whether the elite
unit would carry out cross-border missions or operate within Colombia only.
End OE Watch Commentary (Berg)
The FARC’s coat of arms, featuring a shield and the Colombian flag along with its
revolutionary symbols..
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revolutionary_Armed_Forces_of_Colombia#/media/File:Escudo_Oficial_de_las_Fuerzas_
Armadas_Revolucionarias_de_Colombia_-_FARC-EP.png , Attribution: Wikimedia Commons

“According to Colombian military intelligence, there are about
1,400 members of Colombian armed groups in Venezuela, who
travel on both sides of the border. “There is no refuge here,
wherever the criminals are, justice has to come,” Duque warned.”
Source: “Colombia crea comando élite para combatir guerrilleros y narcos ‘protegidos’ por Maduro (Colombia creates elite command to fight
guerrillas and narcos ‘protected’ by Maduro),” Noticiero Digital (well-known center to center-right Venezuelan media outlet), 8 February
2021. https://www.noticierodigital.com/2021/02/colombia-crea-comando-elite-para-combatir-guerrilleros-y-narcos-protegidos-por-maduro/
According to Colombian military intelligence, there are about 1,400 members of Colombian armed groups in Venezuela, who travel on both
sides of the border. “There is no refuge here, wherever the criminals are, justice has to come,” Duque warned… Colombia has constantly
denounced that Venezuela shelters Colombian rebels, something that the Chavista administration has denied and calls “ fake news.”

Source: “Colombia crea comando élite para combatir guerrilleros de las FARC (Colombia creates elite command to fight FARC guerrillas),”
La Jornada (popular and left-leaning Mexican daily with reporting throughout Latin America), 8 February 2021. https://www.jornada.com.
mx/notas/2021/02/08/mundo/colombia-crea-comando-elite-para-combatir-guerrilleros-de-las-farc/
Among the “high value targets” the president cited former FARC guerrillas who broke away from the 2016 peace agreement such as Iván
Márquez, Jesús Santrich, Hernán Darío Velásquez, known as ‘El Paisa’, Henry Castellanos, alias ‘Romaña’ , among others. Also on the list
are members of the National Liberation Army (ELN), the last recognized active guerrilla in Colombia, and of the Clan del Golfo, the country’s
largest drug gang.

OE Watch | March 2021

49

LATIN AMERICA
Brazil’s Open Border Policy Runs into Steadfast Peru
OE Watch Commentary: Brazil’s open border policy has been
challenged in recent years with waves of immigrants from around
the Americas. For a variety of reasons hundreds of these foreigners
are currently seeking to leave Brazil for other destinations, including
the United States and Canada via the small border town of Assis
Brasil in the Brazilian state of Acre. Unfortunately they have not
been allowed to enter Peru due to COVID restrictions in place by
Peru for nearly a year.
According to the excerpted article from Globo, one of Brazil’s
leading daily news sources, there are more than 500 immigrants,
comprised of mainly Haitians and Venezuelans, trying to cross the
border and enter the Peruvian city of Iñapari. The majority are being
housed at two nearby schools that have been turned into temporary
Brazilian officer 2nd Jungle Brigade discussing border security operation in the Amazon, 2016. shelters. The rest are camped out on Integration Bridge connecting
Source: Dodge Billingsley, Attribution: permission of photographer (Dodge Billingsley)
the two countries. The article points out that the situation escalated
when some of the refugees tried to circumvent the checkpoint and sneak or force their way into Peru, which, after Columbia, hosts more Venezuelan
refugees than any other country in South America.
These developments have only exacerbated the tension between Peruvian and Brazilian authorities at the triple border point between Peru,
Bolivia, and Brazil. This is also the latest in a long history of transnational migration between Peru and Brazil at this location. For years, an Army
Special Border Platoon has been permanently deployed to the Assis Brasil corridor to assist in border security.
This border episode also highlights the struggle between federal and local policy in Brazil regarding its open border stance and the pressure it
puts on border states that bear the burden of implementing the policy (see “Brazil’s Migrant Problem,” OE Watch March 2019 and “Coronavirus
Challenges Brazil’s Federal Open Border Policy,” OE Watch, April 2020). When people in transit get stuck at these border locations they become
the responsibility of the state, in this case Acre. The appearance of the federal Minister of Citizenship in Assis Brasil seems to indicate that there
will be a unified response to the impasse with Peru, which would alleviate some of the pressure put on the local government of Acre. At the same
time, Brazil is concerned about immigrants from Peru entering Acre. According to a second excerpted article from UOL Noticias, an independent
Brazilian news organization, personnel from the National Public Security Force were being sent to Acre to help stop any immigration from
Peru into Brazil. Due to ongoing COVID concerns and policies, there is no end in sight for the border standoff. End OE Watch Commentary
(Billingsley)

Map of Punto Tripartito (Bolivia-Perú-Brasil).

Source: Green 88, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Punto_Tripartito_(Bolivia-Perú-Brasil).svg, Attribution: CC BY-SA 4.0

OE Watch | March 2021

50

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Brazil’s Open Border Policy Runs into
Steadfast Peru
Source: “No AC, Ministério da Cidadania analisa situação de imigrantes e se reúne com governo peruano para tratar sobre fronteira fechada
(In Acre, Ministry of Citizenship analyzes the situation of immigrants and meets with the Peruvian government to deal with the closed
border),” Globo (Privately held Brazilian media conglomerate), 19 February 2021. https://g1.globo.com/ac/acre/noticia/2021/02/19/no-acministerio-da-cidadania-ve-situacao-de-imigrantes-e-se-reune-com-governo-peruano-para-tratar-sobre-fronteira-fechada.ghtml
On Sunday (14), about 400 immigrants left the shelters they occupied in Assis Brasil and concentrated on the Integration Bridge, on the
border with Peru. The immigrants tried to leave the country, but were stopped by the Peruvian authorities. On Tuesday (16), the immigrants
faced the Peruvian police and invaded the city of Iñapari, on the Peruvian side of the border. After confrontation, the group was reunited by
the Peruvian police and sent back to Assis Brasil. Part of the group agreed to return to the shelters provided by the city, but some immigrants
continue to occupy the Integration Bridge.
The National Secretary of Social Assistance, of the Ministry of Citizenship, Miguel Ângelo Gomes, was this Friday (19th) in Assis Brasil, a
city in the interior of Acre that borders Peru, to see up close the situation of immigrants who are in the municipality of Acre and try to cross
the border to leave Brazil.
Of the more than 500 foreigners who are in the municipality, most of them Haitians, at least 80 of them still occupy the Integration Bridge,
since Sunday (14). The immigrants tried to leave the country, but were stopped by the Peruvian authorities. The border on the Peruvian side is
closed because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
… according to the Government Agency of Acre, the Peruvian authorities informed that the country is evaluating a way to open the border to
free the passage of immigrants, but that, for now, the border on the Peruvian side remains closed.
… The Peruvian manager also said that the situation worsened after foreigners tried to cross the border without authorization.
… the Ministry of Citizenship will help the state and the municipality to confront what it called a humanitarian crisis on the border. “We
came to see the reality and listen to the demands of the city, which is at the forefront of this situation. With the detailed report, we will expedite
aid within what urgency allows.”
State supports while federal aid does not arrive
The mayor of Assis Brasil, Jerry Correia, said from G1 that the federal government is expected to understand ‘once and for all the gravity
of this situation.’ … To immediately announce [a federal government] a plan for the removal of these [immigrants], taking them to their
destinations and creating a structure in Assis Brasil, which only the federal government is able to create, through the Armed Forces. you can
have an idea. Yesterday we served 520 meals at lunch in the two shelters and on the bridge and another 520 at dinner. We have about 300
people in both shelters “, he said.
On Thursday (18), the secretary of Snas participated in a meeting at Seasdhm with several state representatives. On the same day, the
National Force began to operate in the city after a decree authorizing reinforcement in the city.
The mayor of Assis Brasil once again said that the city does not only need resources for assistance, but rather a plan to resolve the situation
that has been going on for more than a year.
Assis Brasil is the city with the highest contamination rate at Covid-19 in Acre. According to the bulletin of the Health Department of Acre
(Sesacre) this Friday (19), there are 1,377 cases for every 10,000 inhabitants in the city. Across the municipality, there are 1,038 confirmed
cases and 12 deaths.
This Thursday (18), in addition to the police officers from the Military Police riot battalion and the Special Border Group (Gefron), more than
12 National Force soldiers arrived in the region to reinforce security and more than 20 federal highway police officers.
A decree from the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, published on Thursday, authorized the use of the National Force in Acre, in
support of police forces in the state. The authorization is valid for 60 days and can be extended. The determination establishes that the
National Forces must assist “in the activities of exceptional and temporary blocking the entry of foreigners into the country, on an episodic
and planned basis”.
These are two situations that cause the number of immigrants to grow in the city of Assis Brasil; the first, that of immigrants who entered
Brazil between 2010 and 2016 in search of a better life and, with the pandemic crisis, try to leave the country to continue their journey to
Mexico, Canada, the United States and other countries.
The second is that Peru, even blocking the passage for the entry of immigrants, allows them to leave for the Brazilian side, so it is a gateway
for Venezuelans.
…

OE Watch | March 2021

51

LATIN AMERICA
Continued: Brazil’s Open Border Policy Runs into
Steadfast Peru

“On Sunday (14 February), about 400 immigrants left the shelters
they occupied in Assis Brasil and concentrated on the Integration
Bridge, on the border with Peru. The immigrants tried to leave the
country, but were stopped by the Peruvian authorities. On Tuesday
(16 February), the immigrants confronted the Peruvian police and
invaded the city of Iñapari, on the Peruvian side of the border.
After confrontation, the group was apprehended by the Peruvian
police and sent back to Assis Brasil. Part of the group agreed to
return to the shelters provided by the city, but some immigrants
continue to occupy the Integration Bridge.”

Source: “Força Nacional atuará para bloquear entrada de estrangeiros no Acre (National Force will act to block foreigners from entering
Acre),” UOL Noticias (center, center-right media outlet owned by Grupo Folha),18 February 2021. https://noticias.uol.com.br/ultimasnoticias/agencia-brasil/2021/02/18/forca-nacional-reforca-fronteira-no-acre.html
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security published in the Official Gazette today (18), an order authorizing the use of the National Security
Force in support of the government of Acre, in the “activities of exceptional and temporary blockade of entry into the country foreigners “.
According to the ordinance, the measure has an “episodic and planned” character, lasting 60 days, as of today. If necessary, this period,
which initially ends on April 18, may be extended.
It will be up to the government of Acre to provide the logistical support necessary for the operation. The contingent must follow the planning
defined by the National Force board, linked to the Ministry of Justice.

Geoff Demarest’s Winning Irregular War is
about a broader set of conflicts than just
‘insurgency.’ In its 144 sections, Geoff
Demarest uses a distinct, reconciled, more
effective strategic grammar that draws on
the disciplines of law and geography over
political science. As Geoff Demarest puts it:
“I hope that some of the ideas in it will be
contagious.”
https://community.apan.org/wg/tradoc-g2/fmso/m/fmso-books/195392/download
OE Watch | March 2021

52

LATIN AMERICA
Argentina Worried about Foreign Vessels in the South
Atlantic
OE Watch Commentary: The Foreign Ministry of Argentina
recently expressed “grave concern” over the presence of foreign
vessels in the South Atlantic, including the USS Greenville, which
had been operating, along with British air support, near the disputed
Falklands Islands. Even though the submarine did not enter Argentine
waters, notes La Nación, a center to center-right Argentinian daily
newspaper with reliable reporting on the Southern Cone, the event
led to speculation in Argentina about Western powers sending a
political message. The article mentions that days earlier, the United
States Coast Guard Stone, its most modern ship to date, did not moor
near Argentina during a multi-country exercise intended to deter
illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing. The La Nación article
speculates that this operation, despite its potential to contribute to
increased maritime safety, was scuttled due to disagreement between
Starboard view of the USS Greenville, a US Navy Los Angeles Class attack submarine.
the two governments. The outlet CNN en Español (a SpanishSource: https://nara.getarchive.net/media/a-starboard-bow-view-of-the-us-navy-usn-los-angeles-class-attack-submarine-29c72d
Attribution: US National Archives Public Domain
language offshoot of the popular US media company) reports that
the Argentine Foreign Ministry reprimanded the vessels as threatening the “nuclear free” status of the South Atlantic region. The episode
indicates a desire by the current Argentine government to reassert its historical sovereignty claims over waters in the South Atlantic, a sensitive
issue that has led Argentina to question the right of passage for U.S. Navy and Coast Guard ships. End OE Watch Commentary (Berg)

“Former Foreign Minister Jorge Faurie referred to the situation
saying that it aroused “great concern” in the Government and
attributed it to a clear message from the US to the country.”
Source: “Tensión por el submarino: ‘Fue un muy claro mensaje por parte de Estados Unidos,’ dijo Jorge Faurie (Tension over a submarine: ‘It
was a very clear message from the United States,’ says Jorge Faurie),” La Nación (one of Argentina’s center to center-right daily newspapers
with reliable reporting on the Southern Cone), 13 February 2021. https://www.lanacion.com.ar/politica/jorge-faurie-nid2601336
Former Foreign Minister Jorge Faurie referred to the situation saying that it aroused “great concern” in the Government and attributed it to
a clear message from the US to the country, “ for not having allowed,” days ago, the Stone of the US Coast Guard to enter Argentine waters…
According to the former foreign minister, despite the fact that both the national government and the United States agreed that the Stone did
not enter for ‘logistical’ reasons, he argued that the event responded to political motivations.

Source: “Argentina expresa preocupación por la presencia de un submarino de EE.UU. que opera en el Atlántico Sur con apoyo Británico
(Argentina expresses worry about the presence of an American submarine operating in the South Atlantic with British Support),” CNN
en Español (a Spanish-language offshoot of the popular US media company), 12 February 2021. https://cnnespanol.cnn.com/2021/02/12/
argentina-preocupacion-submarino-ee-uu-atlantico-sur-apoyo-britanico/
The Argentine authorities maintain, “The presence of ships capable of carrying and using nuclear weapons in the South Atlantic contradicts
Resolution 41/11 of the United Nations General Assembly (Zone of Peace and Cooperation in the South Atlantic). It adds that this provision
calls for respecting that region ‘as a zone of peace and cooperation.’”

OE Watch | March 2021

53

